;hitoeng041.txt

another stout bull, fastened him to the yoke of the cart and journeyed on. Thereafter Samjivaka too, having supported his weight on three legs, rose up. For,
Life (when one is to live longer) preserves safe the vitals of one although plunged into the ocean or fallen from a mountain or bitten by the deadliest of cobras.
Although pierced with hundreds of arrows, a creature will not die out of his time of death); but when his time has arrived he will not live when pierced even with a blade of the Kusa grass.
That which is defended by Fate lives, although (otherwise) unprotected, and that which is smitten by fate perishes, although well guarded: one without a protector and left in a desert lives (when protected by fate), while one (doomed to die) does not live in a house, although well taken care of (lit. although efforts be made to save him).
Then, as days passed on, Samjivaka, as he feasted and sported at pleasure and roamed through the wood, became sleek and hale in body and bellowed aloud. A lion, Pingalaka by name, lived in that forest, enjoying the pleasures of royalty he had acquired by the might of his arms. For it is said--
No coronation ceremony nor any other rite is performed upon the lion by the beasts: but the sovereignty over beasts of him who acquires a kingdom by his prowess is self-existent. -19.
[Page 35]
Once the lion being troubled by thirst went down to the bank of the Yamuna to drink water. There he heard the bellowing of Samjivaka like the unseasonable roaring of clouds and such as he had never heard before. Hearing that he turned back with a start without drinking water, and, having returned to his abode, stood silent, pondering what it could mean. He was observed in that condition by two jackals, named Karataka and Damanaka, the sons of his minister. Seeing him in that situation, Damanaka said to Karataka-Dear Karataka, why is it that our lord, although thirsty, has not drunk water but stands still, dazed and alarmed? Karataka replied--Friend Damanaka, he is not served at all according to our counsel (or, according to my advice he should not be served at all). If that is the case, what is the good of our observing his doings?
