;hitoeng045.txt

45
Great is the difference between horses, elephants and metals; between kinds of wood, stones, and garments; and between women, men and water (i.e. between horse and horse &c.) So also, - 40.
A dog, having obtained a piece of even a fleshless bone soiled with the remnant of a few sinews and narrow, is quite delighted: it does not, however, satisfy his hunger; while the lion, having discarded a jackal though come to his lap, kills an elephant: every man, although reduced to straits, desires a reward befitting his valour (or worth).
Moreover, mark the difference between one deserving to be served and (one fit to be) a servant.
Wagging the tail, falling down at the feet and lying on the ground exhibiting the mouth and the belly-all this the dog does before his master; but the lordly elephant looks on patiently and eats with hundreds of coaxing words (addressed to him).
Again,
Those who know it (i. e. what life is) call that, indeed, life which is gloriously lived by men although for a moment, and which is invariably attended with knowledge, exploit and fame: (otherwise) a crow also lives for a long time and eats an oblation,
Again,
[Page 39]
What is the use of the life of him in the world of men who does not show pity to his son or to his preceptor, to his servants or to a poor man or to his relations? A crow also lives long and eats oblations. Also this--
What difference is there between a beast and a human beast whose intellect is void of the power of discriminating between good and bad, who sets at naught most of the rules of conduct enjoined by the sruti and whose only desire is to fill up his belly?
Karataka said--As for us, we are subordinates. This being the case, why should we busy ourselves with this matter? Damanaka replied--In what space of time (i. e. in a short time if they have the ability) do ministers become principal or sub ordinate ? For,
No one in this world is generous towards, beloved by or wicked to another: it is a man's own actions alone that lead him to greatness or to the reverse (i. e. man is the architect of his own fortune). Also,
