;hitoeng013.txt

Giving up all regard for this perishable body which is made of flesh, urine, ordure, and bones, save my reputation, 0, friend. See,
If lasting and unsullied fame be gained at the expense of the body which is perishable and a vehicle of dirt, what would not be gained ? For,
Very great is the distance that separates the body from the qualities: the body is liable to destruction in a moment, while the qualities endure to the end of the universe.
Having heard this, Hiranyaka, being delighted at heart and with his hair standing on end, said -- Noble, friend, noble ! By this your affection for your followers, you deserve the sovereignty of even the three worlds. With these words, he cut off the bonds of them all. Then Hiranyaka, having cordially received all, said -- Dear Chitragriva, in regard to this your being caught in a net you should not blame yourself by suspecting any fault on your part. For,
That very bird, who sees his prey from a distance of more than a hundred yojanas, sees not the snares (laid for him) when his time has arrived. Moreover, 
;- 50.
When I behold the oppression of the moon and the sun by the monsters (Rahu and Ketu), the imprisonment of even the elephant and the cobra, and the poverty of the talented, I come to think -- Fate, alas, is powerful! And again, 
Even birds moving (or, sporting) in a part of (or exclusively in) the sky meet with calamity; and the fishes, too, are caught by experts from the sea with its unfathomable waters; so what is an evil act or a good one in this world, or of what avail is a position of advantage ? For, the god of destruction, with his hand in the form of a calamity stretched forth, seizes even from afar. 
[Page 12]
 Having thus enlightened him, he entertained him hospitably, embraced him and dismissed him to go; whereupon Chitragriva, with his attendant train, went to the regions he liked to go to. Hiranyaka too entered his burrow.
One should make hundreds of friends, of whatever description they may be: behold, the pigeons were released from bonds by their friend, the mouse.
Now the crow Laghupatanaka, the witness of the whole affair, said this in astonishment: Ho, Hiranyaka, you are
