;hitoeng022.txt

22
The crow said–There is a place well examined. Hiranyaka asked—'Which is that?' The crow replied: There is a lake called Karparagaura in the Dandaka forest. There dwells a pious tortoise, who is my dear friend, acquired a long while ago. For,
To be wise in giving advice to others is a thing very easy for all to do; but to be true to the discharge of one's proper duties (or, to discharge ono's duties as required by religion) belongs to some magnanimous soul (only). He will entertain me with choice dainties. Hiranyaka too said--And what am I to do by staying here? For,
One should abandon that country in which one cannot command respect, has no means of livelihood, no relatives, and no (possibility) of acquiring knowledge of any kind. Also,
One should not reside in a country where there is a lack of these five, viz., subsistence, dread (of authority ), sense of shame, politeness, and charitableness.
One should not dwell there, O friend, where these four things do not exist, viz., a creditor, a physician, a Brahmana versed in the Vedas and a river with water (ever flowing).
Therefore, take me there too. Then the crow arrived at the lake with ease conversing on diverse subjects with that friend of his. Then Manthara, having seen them from a distance, addressed a fitting welcome to Laghupatanaka and received the mouse with hospitality due to a guest. For,
Let a boy or an old man or a young man come to the house, respect should be shown to him; a guest is the object of
worship everywhere. -108. 
[Page 19]
The crow said-Friend Manthara, do him special honour.
For he is the king of mice, Hiranyaka by name, foremost of those whose actions are meritorious and an ocean of mercy. The king of serpents, aided by his twice thousand tongues even, will not be able to sing the praise of his merits. Having said so he described the episode about Chitragriva. Manthara having respectfully entertained Hiranyaka said-Good friend, kindly relate the cause of your coming to a dreary wood. Hiranyaka said--I will; may you listen. 
FABLE IV. 
There is a convent of recluses in the city of Champaka. In it dwelt a hermit, Chudakara by name. He was in the habit of sleeping after having hung on a peg his alms-pot, containing
