;hitoeng047.txt

47
Karataka observed--Perhaps the lord might disregard you for your entrance (into his presence) at an inopportune time. He replied--Let it be so. Still a servant must necessarily be in the presence of his master. For,
Not beginning a thing through fear of fault (or, of an ill consequence) is the sign of a coward; who, brother, leaves off taking food for fear of indigestion? See--
A king favours (or gets attached to) a man who is near him, whether he be illiterate, low-born or unworthy of association (or, not attached to his master): as a general rule, kings, young women and creepers cling to (lit. twine round) him who is near them.
Karataka said--Now going there what will you say? He said--Hear me. In the first place I will ascertain whether the master is attached to me or not. Karataka asked--What is the sign from which this can be known? Damanaka replied--
Listen.
[Page 41]
Looking (at one) from a distance, smiling, great regard for inquries about one's welfare, praising the merits even in one's absence: remembering one among objects which are dear, attachment even when one does not serve, making a donation with sweet words and noting one's merits even when one is at fault—these are the signs of a lord well-attached.-60. Again,
Delaying, encouraging hopes, but disappointing as to their fulfilment, these a talented man should know to be the signs of a lord ill-disposed.
Laying all this to heart I will speak in such a way as to bring him under my power. For,
Wise men give us a vivid picture of failure to result from impedements foreseen and a bad use of policy and success resulting from a judicious use of the expedients and the proper employment of policy.
Karataka observed—Still you should not speak until you find a proper opportunity. For,
Even Brihaspati uttering a speech out of its season will be contemned as one wanting in discrimination and meet with eternal disgrace.
Damanaka said--Friend, be not afraid. I shall not speak unseasonably. For,
