;hitoeng078.txt

78
FABLE VI.
There was a wheel-wright in the town of Yauvanasri named Mandamati (Dull-wit). He knew his wife was false, but had never seen her, with his own eyes, with her lover in the same place. Then the wheel-wright saying that he was going to a village set out, but after having gone some way he returned secretly and hid himself in his house under the cot. Now the wife of the wheel-wright, confident that he had gone to another village, called her lover just in the evening. There after, as she was sporting heartily with him on the cot, she got a slight touch of his (the wheel-wright's) body as he lay under the cot, and feeling sure that it was her husband, became disconcerted. Thereupon the gallant asked her-Why don't you sport with me lustily to-day but appear to be bewildered? To this she replied--You are quite ignorant of the truth. He who is the lord of my life, and with whom I have been in friendship from childhood has gone to a village. Without him, this village, although full of people, is to me as a desert. How has he fared in that strange place? What has he eaten ? How has he managed for his bedding ?- with such thoughts is my mind distracted. What then, asked the gallant, is that wheel-wright such an object of love to you? The whore replied--You blockhead, why do you chatter thus? Listen--
She, who, although addressed in harsh words or looked at with angry eyes, receives her husband with a cheerful countenance, is the abode of religious merit.
[Page 68]
The worlds of great bliss are (in reserve) for those women who love their husband, whether living in a city or a wilderness, whether reprobate or virtuous. Again,
The husband is the most precious ornament of a woman althogh without (other) ornaments: for without him, she, even though decorated, is without grace.
You are a paramour. Through levity of heart, I sometimes consort with you, as I would chew a roll of betel-nut leaves no put on flowers. But he is my master, having power to sell me, or to give me away to the gods or the Brahmanas. In short, I live while he lives, and will die with him when he dies. This is my resolve. For,
For years three crores and a half-which is the number of hair on the human body--does a woman live in heaven, who follows her husband in death. Moreover,
