;hitoeng079.txt

79
Just as a snake-catcher forcibly draws a serpent out of its hole, so does she take her husband to heaven and is exalted with him. Moreover,
The wife, who having clasped her dead husband on the funeral pyre quits her body, will, although she might have committed sins to be counted by hundreds, go to heaven with her husband.- 30.
Having heard all that, that wheel-wright said to himself--Blessed am I whose wife is so sweet-speaking and attached to her lord! With these thoughts in his mind, he having taken on his head the cot with the man and woman upon it danced with joy. Hence I say- A fool is pleased &c. I was then treated with the usual formalities by the king and dismissed. The parrot too is coming after me. All this being considered, let the course to be adopted be well attended to. The Chakravaka observed smilingly--Please Your Highnees, the crane, for one, has advanced Your Highness's interests to the best of his ability. But my lord, this is the nature of fools. For,
One should give a hundred but not quarrel—this is the opinion of the wise : but a strife without cause is the sign of the foolish.
The king remarked--What is the use of finding fault with the past? Let us attend to the matter in hand. Chakravaka--My lord, I will speak in private. For,
The wise read the thoughts of others from complexion, outward features and the echo of voice, as also from the movements of the eyes and the mouth: one should, therefore, hold a consultation in private.
[Page 69]
The king and the minister remained there; the rest withdrew to other places. The Chakravaka spoke--Sire, my idea is this--The crane has done this at the instigation of some one of our officers. For,
A sick man is most welcome to physicians, and such is one who is vicious (or, one in trouble) to the officers of state: the clever prey upon fools, while one of a high caste is the life of the good.
The king remarked--Be that as it may. The cause may be investigated afterwards. Just now let it be determined what steps we are to take. Chakravaka-My lord, let our spy first go
