;hitoeng113.txt

113
Then they fell thinking--Let us manage things in such a way that our master will kill Chitrakarna. What have we to do with this thorn-eater? The tiger said--Our master has favoured him by giving his word of surety. How can this be possible then? The crow observed--Now that our master is grown lean (for want of food) he will commit even sin. For,
A woman oppressed with hunger will abandon even her son; a female serpent distressed with hunger will eat even her egg; what sinful act is a hungry man not capable of? Men when reduced to poverty, become cruel. Again, -60.
A drunkard, one exceedingly careless, one gone mad (or, who is delirious), one fatigued, one who is in the power of anger, one who is hungry, one who is covetous, one who is timid, one engaged in a business brooking no delay, and a lover, mind not what is just.
Having thus deliberated they went to the lion. The lion asked--Have you got anything for food? They said--We have found nothing, even after an effort. The lion asked--What is the means of our sustenance now? The crow replied--By your not availing yourself of the food at command we are all in the jaws of death. What is the food at my command?-asked the lion. The crow whispered into his ear—Chitrakarna. The lion having touched the ground and then his ears, said--We have retained him here by pledging our word of safety. So how can this be possible ?
As they (the wise) speak of the gift of safety as the greatest of all gifts, so they do not talk of land, nor of gold, nor of a cow, nor of food. Moreover,
If a supplicant be well protected, that fruit is obtained which is the reward of the performance of a horse-sacrifice which is rich in the gift of (i.e. which grants) all desires.
The crow said your lordship need not kill him. But we shall so contrive it that he will consent to offer his own body. The lion, on hearing this, remained silent. Getting an opportunity thereby, the crow fabricated a plot and taking them all with him went up to the lion. Now the crow said--Lord, even after busy search we have found nothing to eat. While our lord is distressed by many fasts. So let him eat my flesh. For,
[Page 97]
All subjects have, indeed, the king for their root (chief support). If the trees have roots (then only) man's effort (to rear them) will be successful.
