;hitoeng075.txt

75
replied, I am a hare sent to you by the divine Moon. Declare your purpose, said the chief of the herd. Vijaya replied--
A messenger never speaks falsely even though weapons be raised against him: for he always declares the truth on account of the immunity from being killed which he always enjoys.
I, therefore, speak by his order. Listen. You did not act properly inasmuch as you caused the hares, the guardians of the Moonlake, to be dispersed. For these hares have long been my protégés. Hence it is that I am called Sasanka (the hare-emblemed). When the messenger had thus declared himself, the head of the herd said thus in terror--This was done in ignorance, I will not go there again. The messenger said--If so, pay your homage to the lord Moon, trembling with anger in the lake, and having (thus) propitiated him, you may go. Then at night the chief of the herd was taken to the pond there shown the tremulous disk of the moon (reflected) in the water and made to bow down. The messenger said--Lord, he committed the fault through ignorance; he should, therefore, be forgiven. He will not do so a second time. With these words he was sent away. Hence I say--When the king is very powerful, success can be obtained &c. Then I said--That royal swan, our master, alone is mighty in valour and is exceedingly powerful. Even the sovereignty of the three worlds would become him, what of a kingdom then! Thereupon the birds, saying--
"Villain, what business have you to tread on our ground?" took me to king Chitravarna. Then having presented me before the king they said after bowing-Sire, please note--this wicked crane, although travelling in our country, speaks contemptuously of your Majesty's feet. The king demanded who I was and where, I came from. They replied--He is an attendant of the royal swan, Hiranyagarbha by name, and has come here from Karpuradvipa. Thereafter, the minister, a vulture, asked me--Who is the prime minister there? I replied--A Chakravaka, named Sarvajna(all-knowing), who is an adept in the principles of all the Sastras (sciences). The vulture remarked--This is proper. He is a native of the same country.
A king should fittingly appoint, as his minister, one who is born in the same country, who is nobly bred (lit. observes the family practices, or who is nobly born and of virtuous conduct; see com.), who is pure and of tried honesty, who is a sound counsellor, who is not addicted to vices and does not swerve
