;hitoeng051.txt

51
bull. Bulls form even our food, how much so of the lion then? Karataka observed: If so, why was the fear of the lord not removed just there and then? Damanaka replied--Had I relieved the king's fear just there, do you think that we could have received this great favour? Also,
The master should never be rendered free from need (of their services) by servants: for having made the master free from need, a servant may fare like Dadhikarna. Karataka asked how it was. Damanaka related :
FABLE III.
On the mountain called Arbudasikhara in the northern region lived a lion, Mahavikrama by name. A certain mouse gnawed the tips of his mane as he slept in his mountain-den. Then seeing the points of his mane bitten off he got angry, but not being able to catch the mouse that was in his hole, he meditated--
When an enemy is insignificant and cannot be overcome by valour, a warrior of his rank should be set forth to kill him.
Having thus reflected he went to a village and having brought a cat, named Dadhikarna, with effort, after securing his confidence, placed him in his den, feeding him on flesh. Thereafter the mouse did not come out of his hole through fear of the cat and the lion slept comfortably, his mane not being bitten. Whenever he heard the noise of the mouse he fed the cat with flesh with greater attention. Once the mouse, as he moved out being oppressed with hunger, was caught by the cat and killed. After that the lion did not hear the sound of the mouse at any time and took little care to feed the cat, as he was no longer useful to him. Then that Dadhikarna, wasting away for want of food, died. Hence my observation–-The master should not be made &c.
Then Damanaka and Karataka went to Samjivaka. Of the two Karataka sat under a tree in a dignified manner. Damanaka went forward to Samjivaka and said–O bull, this general Karataka here, appointed to keep guard over the forest by king Pingalaka, orders you--Come here at once; or, retire to a distance from this wood: else the consequence will be disastrous (adverse) to you. I don't kuow what our royal master, if angry, will do. Then Samjivaka, ignorant of the ways and manners of the country, advanced with fear and made a profound bow to Karataka. For it is said,
