;hitoeng036.txt

- 36
proaches (keeps faithful to) her husband, though lean, deformed, sickly and penniless..203.
[Page 30]
Your Majesty, therefore, should be so pleased as to come quickly that the auspicious moment may not be lost. Having said so he rose up and went away. Thereupon that Karpuratilaka, drawn by the lust of a kingdom and running by the way taken by the jackal, got stuck in deep mud. Then the elephant said--Friend, jackal, what should be done now? I am plunged in mud and shall perish. Just turn back and look at me. The jackal replied with a smile,
My lord, take hold of my tail and get up. Since you placed confidence in the words of one like me, suffer the misery for which there is no help. For, it is said
When thou wilt take delight in the company of the good thou shalt prosper : but as soon as thou joinest the company of wicked men, thou shalt fall (suffer ruin).
Then the elephant that had sunk in the deep mire was devoured by the jackals. Therefore I say. “What can be achieved by means of a device" &c. Then by the advice of the procuress the prince engaged the young merchant, named Charudatta, as servant. Afterwards he was employed by him in the most confidential affairs.
One day the prince, having bathed and anointed himself and put on gold and jewel ornaments said–-From to-day I have to observe a vow in honour of Gauri which will last for a month. Bring me, therefore, every night, a young woman of a noble family. I shall have to worship her in due form. Thereupon that Charudatta brought and presented a youthfal damsel as described and remaining concealed watched how he acted. That Tungabala too, without touching the young lady, offered her worship from a distance with garments, ornaments and fragrant unguents and sent her away with a guard. Now the young merchant, full of confidence at what he had seen, and his mind biased by avarice, brought his own wife Lavanyavati, and presented her. That Tungabala too, knowing that she was Lavanyavati, the darling of his heart, rose up in a hurry, embraced her firmly and with his eyes closed (in joy ) sported with her on a sofa. Beholding that, the young merchant utterly at a loss to know what to do, like a figure drawn in a painting, was plunged in great sorrow. Hence I say--“On seeing with his own eyes" &c. You too will fare like that.
