;hitoeng017.txt


lamenting. On perceiving this, the cat slipped out of the hollow and escaped. After that, the birds, who were making a close search here and there, discovered the bones of their nestlings in the hollow of the tree. Then all the birds having come to the conclusion - our young ones have been eaten by this very Jaradgava -- put him to death. Therefore, I say -- "To one of unknown family and disposition &c." On hearing this the jackal said angrily - On the day the deer saw you first, your honour too was one whose family and disposition were not known. How comes it then that this friendly behaviour towards you is gaining strength day by day?
Where there is absence of learned men, even a man of little intellect is lauded ; in a country destitute of trees even the castor-oil plant stands out as a tree. Also, 
;-70. 
[Page 15]
This is mine : this is a stranger -- such is the counting of the
little-minded : while to the large-minded the whole world is their family.
Just as the deer is my friend, so are you too. The deer said -- What is the use of this altercation? Let us all live happily together in friendly discourse. For,
No one is anybody's friend or anybody's foe: it is the behaviour (or, intercourse) that makes friends or foes.
The crow said -- Be it so. Then in the morning, they all went to places where their will led them.
Once the jackal said to the deer in solitude -- Friend, in a corner of this wood there is a field full of corn. I shall take you there and show it to you. That being done, the deer went there every day and ate the corn. Now, the master of the field observed this and set a snare. Then the deer going there again was caught into the snare; whereapon he reflected -- Who but a friend can deliver me from the hunter's snare as from the snare of Death? Presently the jackal came up and standing near reflected -- As to the success of my wish, it has borne fruit by my well-arranged scheme. When he will be cut up, I am sure to get his bones covered with flesh and blood which will serve me as food plentifully. The deer, delighted at his sight, said,
Friend, cut my bonds at once ; quickly save me. For,
One should know (the sincerity of) a friend in calamities, a warrior in battle, an honest man when in debt, a wife when fortune declines and relatives in difficulties. Also,
