;hitoeng086.txt

86
Those fools, who without taking counsel rashly enter into the enemy's army, are sure to get an embrace with the edges of their swords.
The king said--Minister, do not at all damp my spirits. Tell me how one wishing for conquest invades his enemy's territory. The vulture replied I will tell you that. But it will yield fruit (prove beneficial) only if acted upon. For it is said--
What is the use of counsel given according to the Sastras (or, like the knowledge of the Sastras) to a king, if it be not acted upon? In no case can a disease be cured by the mere knowledge of medicine.
But as the command of a king is not to be transgressed, I will relate what I have learnt from the tests on the subject. Please to listen --
In rivers, mountains, wilds and difficult passes, wherever there is danger, O king, there the general should march with his forces drawn in battle-array.
The commander of the forces should march in the van, accompained by the flower of the army; in the middle should be stationed the women, the king, the treasury and the unimportant sections of the army.
On each flank the horse; on the sides of the horse the chariots; on both sides of the chariots the elephants, and on the flanks of the elephants the foot-soldiers.
In the rear should slowly march, O king, the commander-in-chief, accompained by ministers and brave warriors, cheering
those that are fatigued and backing the army. - 72
[Page 75]
One should traverse uneven ground abounding in water and full of hills by means of elephants, plains by means of horses, and rivers by means of boats, while the infantry should be employed in all place.
A march with elephants is said to be advantageous at the approach of the rainy season, with the horse at other times, and with foot-soldiers in all seasons.
In hills and difficult passes the king should be protected; and he should sleep wakefully even though guarded by brave men.
One should destroy and harass the enemy by hard-pressing him in difficult places; and at the time of entering into the enemy's country, the foresters should be placed foremost.
