;hitoeng011.txt


Even now let this be done. Let us all, being of one mind, fly away with the net. For,
The union of even small things leads to the accomplishment of an object ; infuriated (rutting) elephants are tied down by means of grass twisted (made) into a rope.
Union with the members of their family, although insignificant, is for the good of men ; rice stripped of even its husk will not grow.
The birds, having thus taken counsel, flew up all with the net. Thereupon the fowler, seeing them, from afar, carrying off the net, and running after them, thought to himself,
These birds, being combined, are bearing away my net ; but when they will fall down (or, out among themselves), they will fall into my power. 
;;-37.
[Page 10]
Then, when the birds bad passed beyond the range of the eye, the fowler returned. Now the pigeons, seeing that the fowler had turned back, said -- What is proper to be done now? Chitragriva said --
A mother, a friend and a father -- these three are naturally friendly ; others are well-disposed according to the law of cause and effect.
Now our friend, Hiranyaka by name, the king of mice, dwells in Chitravana (a beautiful forest) on the bank of the Gandaki. He will cut off our bonds. Having thus deliberated, they all went to the hole of Hiranyaka. Hiranyaka, on his part, always apprehensive of danger, had made a burrow with a hundred passages and lived in it. Then Hiranyaka, startled with fear at the descent of the pigeons, stood silent. Chitragriva said -- Dear Hiranyaka, why don't you talk to us? Then Hiranyaka, having recognised his voice, rushed out in haste and said -- Ah, happy am I! my beloved friend Chitragrîva has come.
No one is more meritorious in this world than he, who talks with his friend, who lives with his friend and who holds a friendly discourse (or, chats) with his friend.
Seeing them caught in the snares he stood astonished for a moment and said -- Friend, what is this ? Chitragriva replied -- Friend, this is the fruit of our deeds in a previous life.
From whatever cause, by whatever means, in whatever manner, at whatever time, of whatever kind, in whatever proportion and at whatever place, one may do a deed, good or


