;hitoeng081.txt

81
One should strive to subdue an enemy by conciliatory means, by gifts, by (sowing seeds of) discord-by all these simultaneously or singly—but never by battle. And further,
Every man is a hero as long as not engaged in a fight: who will not be proud that has not yet experienced the strength of his enemy (or, of another)? Moreover,
A stone is not raised by men so easily as it is with a pole (serving as a lever); great success by trifling means is the great fruit of counsel.
But seeing that war is at hand let the necessary steps be taken. For,
As husbandry becomes fruitful from labour spent upon it in due season, so, my lord, this policy (political measures) bears fruit after a long time (when the proper time comes), and not in a moment. Again,
Fearing a danger when at a distance but displaying bravery when it is at hand is a virtue that belongs to the great : a great man, in this world, conducts himself bravely in adversity.
Also,
Mental agitation is the first (greatest) obstacle to success of every kind: does not water, even though exceedingly cold, break through a mountain? More particularly because king Chitravarna is very powerful. For,
There is no ordinance to the affect that one should fight with the powerful: that fight which is between men and elephants must result in the destruction of the former. Again,-46.
[Page 71]
He is a fool who without getting the proper opportunity commences operations against his adversary: a strife with the powerful is like an insect getting wings (UAT v. l. like the exertions of an insect's wings, i. e. quite futile ). Moreover,
Having recourse to the tortoise's mode of contracting its body one should suffer even a blow: but when the right time comes, one, knowing the policy, should rise like a fierce cobra.
I invite your attention, my lord, to this,
One who knows how to use the proper remedies is able to uproot the great and the small equally, as is the current of a river which sweeps away the trees and grass.
For this purpose, let this parrot, the enemy's emissary, be given assurances and detained here until the fortress is prepared.
