;hitoeng088.txt

88
It is better to have a small army of chosen men than a multitude of heads: for the defeat of the weak will evidently lead to that of the strong.
Witholding of favour, not getting posts of honour*, seizing the portion due (to any one), delay (in payment or advancement) and non-retaliation (or, not redressing wrongs)-these are the causes of the disaffection of the troops. - 90.
One wishing to gain victory should attack his enemies without hard-pressing his own army: for the army of the enemies, when extremely wearied by long marches, can be easily overpowered.
There is no cleverer stroke of policy than a kinsman (of the enemy won over) causing the over-throw of an enemy: one should, therefore, set up, by all means, a kinsman of the enemy against him.
Having entered into a league with the heir-apparent or the principal minister (of the enemy), an invader who is steady of purpose, should cause internal dissentions (in his enemy's camps).
One should cause the destruction of a formidable ally (of his enemy) by giving him a defeat on the battlefield (or by fleeing before him and then suddenly turning upon him), or by seizing
his cattle and capturing his principal men and dependants.
[Page 77]
A king should cause his country to be populated by men brought forcibly from other countries, or rather, by means of gifts and the bestowal of honour; for when replenished with subjects it proves prosperous.
The king observed--Ah, why waste more words on this?
The aggrandizement of one's power and the decline of that of the enemy--the accomplishment of these two is all policy : having put forth this pre-eminently, those versed in policy display great eloquence (lit. play the Brihaspati).
The minister observed with a smile--All this is true, but--
Unrestrained might is one thing, while might guided (or governed) by (the principles of) science is quite another: for whence can there be the existence of light and darkness in one and the same place?
Then the king, having got up set out at the auspicious hour
declared by the astrologers.
*Lit. Non-leadership. + Or, one should cause internal discord (in the camps of) an invader who is &c.
