;hitoeng023.txt

23
the remnant of the food collected by begging after he had eaten of it. I used every day to leap up and eat that food. After some time a dear friend of his, Vinakarna by name, a hermit, came there. While engaged in conversation with him Chudakarna kept beating the ground with an old bamboo stick. Vinakarna said-Friend, why do you take no interest in my story and are busy with something else? Chudakarna replied-Friend, not that I am indifferent (to your conversation ), but look at this mouse, doing wrong to me, who by jumping up always eats the food collected by me by begging and placed in that pot. Vinakarna, having looked at the peg, observed—How can a mouse, possessed of little strength, jump to such a height? There must be some reason for this. For it is said--
The young wife, having suddenly drawn her old husband by the hair, kissed him with a close embrace; there must be some reason for this.
Chudakarna demanded how it was, whereupon Vinakarna related--
FABLE V.
There is, in the country of Gauda, a city, Kausambi by name. In it dwelt a merchant of great wealth, Chandanadasa by name. Although in the decline of age, he through the pride of wealth, and his mind being full of passion, married merchant's daughter, Lilavati by name. She attained youth, looking like the victorious banner of the god of love; while that aged husband did not please her. For,
The heart of women delights not in a husband whose limbs are worn out by old age, as does not that of men pinched with cold in the (rays of the) moon, or that of men oppressed with heat in the sun. Moreover, 110.
What passion can men have, when the hair even is turned grey, since women, whose heart is set on others, regard it as medicine? However, that old husband had a very great affection for her.
The lust of wealth and the desire for life of men is ever great; but to an old man a youthful wife is dearer than his life.
An old man is not able to enjoy pleasures or to abandon them either: as a dog without teeth simply licks a bone with his tongue (but does not throw it off).
