; hitoeng009.txt

Also, the actions of those, whose senses and mind are not under control, are like the bath of an elephant:* knowledge without action is a burden, like feeding an ill-natured (lit. unlucky) woman or like ornaments on an ugly woman.
[Page 8]
I, therefore, did not do well in that I placed confidence in
this ferocious beast. For, says the precept --
Trust should never be placed in rivers, in persons having weapons in their hands, in animals armed with claws, and horns, as well as in women and royal families.** Again,
It is the natural disposition of every one that is tested, and not his other qualities; for having surpassed all (other) qualities, disposition stands at the head. And further,
; 20
 That well-known sporter in the sky, the destroyer of sin (darkness), possessor of a thousand rays (bands), and marching in the midst of the stars, even he, the Moon, is devoured (eclipsed) by Rahu, by the decree of fate: who is able to efface what is written on the forehead ? 
While thus musing he was killed by the tiger, and eaten.
Therefore I say "Through the last of a bracelet &c." For this reason nothing rash should at all be done. For,
Food well digested, a son very wise (well educated), a wife well disciplined, a king served faithfully, what is spoken after being well thought over and what is done after due consideration -- these do not lead to a bad result even after a very long time.
On hearing these words a certain pigeon said arrogantly -- Ah, why is it so said ?
The words (counsel) of the aged should be acted upon (followed) only when the time of calamity is at hand : if we consider thus in all matters, we can hardly proceed to take our food. For,
Everything on the surface of the earth, food and drink, is involved in doubt: to what should an attempt be directed and how should life be supported ?
One who is envious, one given to reviling, one (ever) discontented, one who is irascible and one who is always suspicious -- these six have misery for their lot.
* Which is useless as the animal is sure to cover his body the next moment with mud.
** (As far as third favour is concerned).
