;hitoeng093.txt

93
in that manner every day, stick in hand, awaited a beggar's arrival. One day he, having found such a beggar, struck him with his stick and killed him. For that offence the barber, being punished by the king's officers, lost his life. Therefore I say, 'What was obtained by one through the force of merit' &c. The king remarked--
How can a stranger (i.e. his real character) be known by narrating stories of the past-whether he is a disinterested friend or a traitor ?
Well, let it pass. Let us attend to what concerns us immediately. If Chitravarna is on the table-land of Malaya, what is best to be done now? The minister said I have heard from the mouth of the spy that came here that Chitravarna has disregarded the counsel of the great minister, Vulture. It will be easy, therefore, to conquer the fool. For it is said--
An enemy who is avaricions, cruel, lazy, treacherous, careless, cowardly, unsteady, foolish, and a despiser of warriors, can be easily destroyed. -107.
Therefore before he blocks up the gates of our castle, let Sarasa and the other generals be ordered to rout his army in the rivers, mountains, wilds and passes. For it is said--
A king should cause the enemy's army to be destroyed when it is fatigued by long marches, hemmed in by rivers, mountains and forests, terrified by the fear of dreadful fires, distressed by hunger and thirst, 
[Page 81]
careless, engaged in eating, aflicted with diseases and famine (or want of supplies), not in good order (disorderly), reduced in numbers, distressed by rain and wind, incommodiously situated in places full of mud, dust or water, scattered about, or put to flight by robbers. Moreover,
A king should destroy (his enemy's army) sleeping by day being fatigued by its keeping awake (the whole night) through the fear of an attack, and thus having the soldiers in it over-powered by sleep.
For this reason, let our generals go and destroy the force of that careless (lit. blundering) king day and night, according to the opportunities they might get. This being done, many of the soldiers and generals of Chitravarna were killed. Upon this Chitravarna being dejected said to bis minister, Duradarsi--Sir, why do you neglect us? Have I in any matter acted insolently towards (insulted) you? For it is said -
