;hitoeng020.txt

[Page 17]
Hiranyaka said -- You are fickle-minded (or, mischievous); and, with the fickle-minded, friendship should not at all be formed. For it is said
A cat, a buffalo, a ram, a crow, and a bad man -- these get the upper hand (get the better of us) through confidence : confidence in them is out of place (lit. it is not proper to put trust in them).
Another consideration is this -- you belong to the side of our enemies. And thus says the precept --
One should not make peace with an enemy even by a compactly-formed treaty: water, although greatly heated, does extinguish fire. Nevertheless,
A wicked man should be shunned although he be adorned with learning; the cobra is decked with a gem : but is he not dreadful?
What is impossible can never be possible; and what is possible is certainly possible: a cart cannot move on water nor can a boat on land. Moreover,
He, who, depending upon the strength of wealth (given to or by his enemies), although great, trusts to his enemies or to wives that have ceased to love him, finds his life end there.
Laghupatanaka said I have heard everything. Yet I am thus far resolved that I must necessarily form friendship with you: or else I will destroy myself by starvation. For,
(Friendship with) a bad man, like a vessel of earth, is easily broken and cemented with difficulty; while (that with) a good man is like a pot of gold, difficult to be broken and easily re-united. Moreover,
The union of metals is due to their fluxibility, of beasts and birds to some cause, of fools to fear or (the prospect of) gain, while of good men to (mere) sight. Also,
Friends appear to be of the form of coconuts (rough and rugged to outward appearance but sweet at heart): others are like jujubes -- attractive from outside only.
Although friendship be at an end, the qualities (behaviour) of good men suffer no change: even when lotus-stalks are broken, the fibres remain sticking (to them) yet. And again
Purity (of purpose), generosity, courage, sameness of behaviour in pleasure or pain, politeness, affection and truthfulness -- these are the characteristics of a (true) friend.
