;hitoeng060.txt

60
What is possible to be accomplished by stratagem cannot be effected by exploits: a crow brought about the destruction of a black serpent by means of a gold chain.
Karataka asked how it was. Damanaka related--
FABLE VII.
A pair of crows lived in a certain tree. Their youngs were eaten by a cobra who lived in the hollow of the tree. Thereafter, the female crow, when again breeding said to her mate--My dear, let us abandon this tree. As long as the serpent lives here, our offspring can never live. For,
[Page 52]
A wicked wife, a cunning friend, an insolent servant, and a
residence in a house infested by a cobra, mean undoubtedly death
Don't you be afraid, my dear, replied the crow. I have pardoned his great crime again and again. But it shall not be tolerated now. The female crow observed--How will you be able to contend with one who is powerful? The crow replied--Away with this doubt. For,
He who has talent has strength; how can he, who is without talent, have strength? Behold, a haughty lion was killed by a hare. The female asked how that was, whereupon the male thus related--
FABLE VIII.
On the mountain named Mandara there dwelt a lion Durdanta by name, who always used to slaughter the beasts. Then all the beasts having assembled together made this representation to the lion--Sovereign of the beasts, why are so many animals slaughtered at a time? If it please Your Highness, we ourselves shall send one beast every day for your food. To this the lion replied--If you desire it let it be done. Thenceforth he ate one animal that was offered him. Now one day the lot fell on an aged hare. He meditated--
It is in the hope of saving one's life that a supplication is made to the source of fear:--If I am to die why should I conciliate the lion?
I shall go then slowly. The lion who was oppressed with hunger, asked him in anger--Why hast thou come so late? The hare replied--My lord, I am not to blame. On my way I was forcibly seized by another lion. Having pledged my word that I would return to him I have come here to represent it to Your Highness. The lion said
