;hitoeng058.txt

58
The sun and the moon, wind and fire, heaven and earth, water, the heart, Yama, day and night, both the twilights and the deity Dharma-—these know the actions of a man.
If then, I am perfectly chaste, and have never even so much as thought of a man other than yourself, let my face be free from its wound. Look at my face. Then as soon as the cow-keeper lighted a lamp, looked at her face and found that it had the nose restored, he fell at her feet saying--Blessed am I whose wife is thus perfectly virtuous. Now attend to the story of the merchant who is here. He, having left his house, came to this city after twelve years, from the vicinity of mount Malaye. He slept in the house of a courtesan. At the door of the harlot's house there stood the wooden image of a spirit, on whose head there was a jewel of the best sort. Seeing that, this merchant, being impelled by avarice, got up in the middle of the night and attempted to take the jewel. Then being pressed by the arms of the spirit which were moved by wires, he uttered a cry of pain. Thereupon the harlot, having got up; said--Holloa, son, you have come from the neighbourhood of Malaya. Deliver, therefore, all the jewels you have to him, else he will not release you. Such is this wily fellow. Then this merchant gave up all his jewels. And now, he too, being robbed of all his wealth, has joined our party.
On hearing all this the king's officers got the judge to do justice. The barber's wife was shaved, the cowherdess expelled the city, the harlot fined and the merchant restored to all his wealth. The barber too went home. Therefore I say-I for having touched Svarnarekha &c. Now this fault is ours, and lamentation is out of place in this case. Having reflected for a moment--Friend, just as I brought about the friendship of these too, so should I effect the disunion of the two friends also. For,
Very clever men represent even untruth as truth (if required), as persons versed in the art of painting represent depressions and prominences on an even surface. Moreover,
He whose intellect does not fail him even under fresh occurrences, surmounts difficulties just as the cowherd's wife got clear of her two lovers.
Karataka asked how it was. Damanaka related--
