;hitoeng026.txt

26
(The period of) life, (the amount of) wealth, a family secret, charms, conjugal enjoyment, medicine, penance, charity and one's disgrace--these nine things should be carefully concealed.
And so it is said
When fate is extremely adverse, and exertions and valour have been of no avail, where, except in a wilderness, can a highminded man, reduced to poverty, find relief? Moreover,
A man of self-respect will rather die than stoop to meanness (act meanly): fire will even suffer extinction, but never become cool. Moreover,
The course of action of a wise man, like that of a bunch of flowers, is twofold, viz., either to stand at (on) the head of all, or to die (wither) away in a forest.
And as to living here on alms, that would be exceedingly despicable. For,
It were better for a poor man to satisfy fire with his life than to solicit a mean person, lost to all civility.
From poverty a man comes to have shame : overwhelmed with shame he loses moral fortitude: with his moral fortitude lost he suffers contempt; being contemned he feels dejected: full of dejection he comes to sorrow; when overcome with sorrow he is forsaken by reason; with his reason gone, he passes on to destruction: Want of wealth, alas, is the abode of all misfortunes !! Again,
Better is silence observed than an untrue word spoken : better is impotency for men than intercourse with another's wife: better to abandon life than to have a liking for the words of the wicked; better to live on alms than to have the happiness of enjoying another's wealth.
[Page 22]
Better to have an empty cow-pen than a naughty ox; better to have a courtesan for wife than an immodest (ill-trained) woman of family; better a residence in a foreat than in the city of a thoughtless king; better is the abandonment of life than approaching the base (with a request). Moreover,
As service destroys all self-respect, moonlight darkness, old age beauty, the stories about Hari and Hara sin, so does beggars destroy even a hundred good qualities.
