;hitoeng077.txt

77
The king asked how that was, whereupon the parrot related--
FABLE IV.
There is a large fig-tree in a forest bordering on the road leading to Ujjayini, upon which lived a goose and a crow. One day in the sultry season, a traveller, being fatigued, slept under the treo, having placed a bow and arrow by his side. After a short while the shadow of the tree moved away from his face. Then, seeing that his face was covered with the sun, a swan, that lived on the tree, through mercy, spread his wings and shaded his face again. Thereafter the traveller, happy in the enjoyment of sound sleep, yawned. Now the crow, unable to bear the happiness of others, through the wickedness natural to his species, muted into his mouth and flew away. Thereupon, as soon as the traveller rose and looked up, he saw the goose whom he killed with an arrow. Hence I say--One should not live with a wicked man. I will also relate the story of the quail.
FABLE V.
[Page 67]
Once upon a time all the birds went to the sea-side, on a pilgrimage in honour of Garuda (the divine Eagle). Among them a quail travelled with a crow. Now the crow repeatedly ate of the curds in a pot which a cowherd was carrying on his head. Thereupon, as he placed his pot on the ground and looked up, the cowherd saw the crow and the quail. The crow being affrighted by him flew away, while the quail being slow of flight was caught and put to death. Hence I say--One should neither live nor go with &c. I then observed--Brother parrot, why do you talk so? I esteem you as much as I do His Majesty. The parrot replied--Be it so; but--
Even sweet things accompained with smiles, said by the wicked, certainly cause fear, like flowers appearing out of season.
As for your wickedness, that was known from your very speech, since your words are the cause of the fight between these two kings. See--
A fool is pleased by conciliatory words, even though an offence be committed before his eyes: (as was) 8 wheel-wright (who) took on his head his wife with her paramour. The king asked how that was, upon which the parrot related--
