;hitoeng050.txt

50
Please reply. Why does my lord stand here, as if amazed, without drinking water, although thirsty ? Pingalaka replied--You have spoken well. But there is no one trustworthy to whom this secret can be confined. You are such a one. Therefore I will communicate it to you. Listen. This forest has now been inhabited by some beast, unheard of before, and must for that reason, be left by us. I am perplexed on this account. Similarly you too have heard that strange loud sound. Great must be the strength of this animal corresponding to his voice. Damanaka replied--My lord, this is, indeed, a great cause for fear. We too have heard the sound. But he is a bad minister who first counsels the quitting of land and then a fight. At this crisis when it is difficult to know what steps to take, the use of servants alone is to be known. For,
A man knows (tests) on the touch-stone of adversity the strength of his relatives, wife and servants, as also of his in. tellect and mental calibre. - 80.
The lion said--Friend, a great terror has overtaken me. Damanaka said again-(To himself) How, else, can you talk to me of leaving the pleasures of a kingdom and going to another place. (Aloud) My lord, as long as I am alive, Your Majesty should have no fear. But Karataka and others should also be encouraged (by marks of royal favour), since it is difficult to have a united body of men at the time of overcoming a calamity.
Then Damanaka and Karataka, on whom every honour was bestowed by the king, set out having promised to ward off the danger. On the way Karatake said to Damanaka--Friend, without ascertaining whether the cause of fear is possible to be averted or not, why did you accept this great favour having undertaken the removal of the fear? For unless one has done a service one should not accept a reward from anybody, especially from a king. Observe,
On his (king's) favour depends wealth, on his exploit victory and on his anger death: for he represents all splendours (energies). So also,
A king although a boy, should not be despised because he is a man; for he is a mighty deity existing in a human form. 
[Page 44]
Damanaka smiled and said--Friend, rest quiet (easy). I have known the cause of fear. That was the bellowing of a
