; hitoeng010.txt

; 10
On hearing this the pigeons alighted on (the grains ). For,
Even those, who are masters of the great Shastras, well-informed, and able to remove doubts, experience trouble when (their judgment is) blinded by avarice. Again --
From greed proceeds disquietude, from greed springs up the desire (for pleasures), and from greed result infatuation and (finally) ruin; greed is the root of sin.
And again,
The existence of a gold deer was impossible and yet Rama coveted (such) a deer; as a general rule when (some) calamity is impending the talents of men become clouded. 
; 28
[Page 9]
After that they were all caught in the net. Then all of them began to revile him, by whose advice they had descended there. For,
One should not go at the head of (lead) a multitude; if the undertaking succeeds, the fruit is the same to (equally shared by) all; but if it fails, the leader is killed. 
Hearing how he was reproached, Chitragriva said -- It is not his fault. For,
Of misfortunes about to befall, even a friend becomes the cause: when a calf is to be tied down the leg of the mother serves as a post.
He is a friend of the afflicted who is able to deliver them from misery, and not he, who is clever (only) in condemning a thing ill done or omitted to be done. (With the reading न तु भीत -- clever in finding fault with the manner of protecting the distressed.)
In the time of adversity, perplexity itself is the sign of a weak-minded man. Therefore, taking courage in this case, think out a remedy. For,
Fortitude in adversity and again forbearance in prosperity, eloquence in an assembly and valour on the battle-field, a liking for fame (good name) and a strong attachment to study -- these are the natural possessions of the magnanimous.
A mother rarely gives birth to a son, an ornament of the three worlds, who does not rejoice in prosperity or feel sorrow in adversity and is firm in battle. Moreover,
A man, wishing for welfare in this world, should avoid these six faults ; viz., sleepiness, slothfulness, timidity, anger, idleness and dilatoriness.
