;hitoeng076.txt

76
from the right path, who has mastered the law relating to disputes, who is hereditary, reputed, learned and an expert in raising revenue.
Just then a parrot observed--Please Your Highness, Karpuradvipa and other small countries are inciuded in Jambudvipa and therefore the authority of Your Highness extends over them also. To this the king replied that it was so. For,
A king, a mad man, a child, a young woman, and one lated with the pride of wealth, desire what is unattainable;
how much more so then what can be certainly obtained?
[Page 66]
To this I said--If by mere words one's sovereignty  can be established, our lord Hiranyagarbha too has mastery over Jambudvipa.
The parzot said--How can this matter be decided? I replied--By war. The king said smilingly--Go and ask your king to be ready.
Then I said--You should send your ambassador also. The king asked--Who will go as an ambassador? For a person of this description should be appointed an ambassador.
A messenger should be devoted to his master, pure (or, honest), diligent, bold, unaddicted to vices, forgiving, a Brahmana, one knowing the weak points (or, secrets of the enemy and ready-witted,
The vulture observed--Many are fit to be ambassadors, no doubt; but a Brahmana alone should be preferred. For,
He pleases his master and does not aim at his wealth: the blackness of Kalakuta (a kind of deadly poison) does not vanish even by its contact with Isvara (Siva). - 20.
The king-Let the parrot go then. Parrot, you yourself then go with him and declare our will. The Parrot--As Your Majesty commands. But this crane is a villain; I will not go with him. For, it is said--
A wicked man commits an evil deed, while its consequences are sure to be suffered by the good. Ravana carried away Sita, while the great ocean suffered confinement (had a bridge built over it). Moreover,
One should not, in any case, live with a wicked man: from their contact with a crow were killed a goose who lived with him and a quail for going on a journey with him.
