;hitoeng066.txt

66
happy ? Damanaka replied--How can there be any happiness for servants? For,
The riches of those who are in royal service are in another's power; their mind is always uneasy, and they have no surety even of their lives. Moreover, -150.
Who, having obtained wealth, does not become proud? The miseries of what sensualist have come to an end? Whose mind is not wounded by woman? Who is a favourite of kings? Who has not fallen into the clutches of Death? What supplicant has met with honour, and what man, fallen into the meshes of the wicked, has escaped unscathed?
Samjivaka said--Friend, speak out what this means. Damanaka replied--What should I say, an unfortunate creature! Behold,
Just as a man plunged into the sea having obtained the support of a serpent, does neither give it up nor hold fast to it, so bewildered am I now. For,
On the one hand is the royal confidence betrayed, on the other, a friend perishes: what shall I do, and where shall I go, I who am fallen into the sea of trouble?
With these words he heaved a deep sigh and sat down. Samjivaka said--Still, friend, tell me in detail what you have at heart. Damanaka said with (a show of) great secrecy--
Although I must not betray the king's secret, yet you have come here through confidence in us; and I, as desiring the next world, must necessarily tell you what concerns your welfare. Listen. This our Lord, being prejudiced against you, said in private--I will kill Samjivaka himself and treat my attendants (with his flesh). Samjivaka, on hearing this, was smitten with great sorrow. Damanaka observed again--Away with sorrow. Do what the time demands. Samjivaka, after a moment’s reflection, said--This is, indeed, well said--
[Page 58]
Women seek the company of wicked men; a king generally patronizes (or, lavishes wealth upon the undeserving; wealth seeks a miser; and the god of rain pours the showers on mountains and seas!
(To himself) Now it is not possible to decide from his manner of acting (or, conversing) whether this is his doing or not. For,
