;hitoeng067.txt

67
Some wicked man possesses splendour (appears good amiable) from the beauty of his master (or patron, lit. the person he depends upon), like fool (black) collyrium when put into their eyes by young women.
After reflection; he says-Alas! What is this that has come to pass ! For,
A king, though served with assiduity, may not be pleased; where is the wonder in this? But this is some strange pattern of creation, who being served is turned into an enemy!!!
So this is a matter (lit. something to be understood by inference) which it is impossible to understand. For,
He who is displeased having some cause in view, is, indeed, pleased when that cause) is removed; but how can a man please him whose mind harbours enmity without cause?
What wrong did I do to the king? Or rather, kings are wont to do injury without any cause. Damanaka observed--It is just so. Listen
Even an act of kindness, done by man eminently learned and affectionate, becomes hateful; while an actual injury done by others is just regarded with pleasure: on account of difficulty of understanding the minds of kings which are unsteady (lit., not the abode of one feeling); the duty of servitude is extremely difficult, not to be comprehended even by Yogis (those who have attained superhuman powers).
Moreover,
A hundred obligations (or, services rendered) are lost upon the wicked; a hundred fine speeches upon the illiterate; a hundred words of advice upon those who would not act up to them; and a hundred counsels on the senseless. Again,
There are serpents on the sandal trees; lotuses grow in water wherein there are also alligators; and when one is in the enjoyment of a thing there are villains to obscure one's good qualities ; (so) pleasures are not without obstructions! And further, - 160.
[Page 59]
The root is infested by serpents, the flowers by bees, the branches by monkeys and the tops by bears; thus there is nothing belonging to the sandal tree that is not resorted to by very cruel and murderous animals.
As for our master, I have known him to be honeyed in speech but carrying poison in the heart. For,
