;hitoeng084.txt

84
For,
That which is the natural disposition of one is always hard to be got rid of. If a dog were made a king would he not gnaw a shoe?
Upon this, being discovered by his voice he will be killed by the tiger. Then that being done that happened (i. e. the plan being put into execution the event turned out as anticipated). For it is said--
[Page 73]
An enemy of our own tribe knows our weak points, our secrets, our valour-our everything, and when such a one is in our midst he burns, as fire in the interior does a dry tree.
I say, therefore,—That fool who having left off his own side &c. The king-Although this is the case, still he must be seen as he has come from a distance. We shall consider the question of his being retained here. The minister--Please Your Highness, the emissary has been sent and the castle put in readiness. Let the parrot, therefore, be granted an interview and dismissed. But, 
Chanakya killed Nanda through the agency of a sharp spy: one should, therefore, see an emissary, acoompanied by wise men and with brave men intervening. -60.
Thereafter a council being called, the parrot and the crow were sent for. The parrot, with his neck raised a little, sat on the seat that was offered him and said--His Imperial Majesty, the great Chitravarna commands you--If you care anything for your life or wealth, come quickly and bow to our feet; or else think of some other place to live in. The king said in a rage--Is there none among our servants here who will seize him by the neck (and turn him out)? Meghavarna rising--Sire, give but your command and I will kill the vile parrot. Sarvajna, having pacified the king and the crow, said-Please listen--
That is not an assembly which has no old men in it; those are not old men who do not declare what is just. That is no justice which has no truth in it; and that is not truth which borders on (leaves room for, partakes of fraud. And justice requires this--
A messenger, even though he be a Mlechchha (an out-caste) is exempt from being put to death; for a king has a messenger for his mouth (i.e. it is the king who speaks through his messenger).
