;hitoeng104.txt

104
One should never ignore (lit. render fruitless) the service rendered by a servant who has done his duty; but should gladden (encourage) him by rewarding (his services) with the mind, speech and eyes.
Chakravaka--What then? The spy-Then the prime minister, the Vulture, said--my lord, this is not proper. Bestow upon him some other favour. For,
Giving advice to one who is inconsiderate is simply like pounding chaff (a bootless labour); an obligation conferred upon a mean person is like pissing on sand.
Moreover, a base man should not be placed in the station of the great. For,
A low person having obtained an exalted position desires to kill his master, just as a mouse having been raised to the state of a tiger went forth to kill the sage.
Chitravarna asked--How was this? The minister related--
FABLE V.
In the penance-grove of the great sage Gotama there lived a hermit, Mahatapas by name. He (once) saw, in the vicinity of his hermitage, a young mouse fallen from the mouth of a crow. The sage being naturally tender-hearted reared it up with grains of wild rice. Now a cat ran to eat the moase, on seeing which it ran to the sage's lap for shelter. Then the sage said--O mouse, be thou a cat. Then the cat would ran away on seeing a dog. Then the sage said-Thou fearest a dog? Be thou a dog thyself. Now the dog was afraid of a tiger, so that the dog was changed into a tiger by the sage. But although a tiger, the sage did not regard him as anything better than a mouse. Now all the people when they saw the sage and the mouse would say--By the sage the mouse was changed into a tiger. Hearing this, the tiger, being distressed at heart, said to himself-So long as this saint lives, this ignominious talk about my real nature will not vanish. Thus reflecting he went forth to kill the saint. Thereupon the holy man, knowing that (his intention), again changed him into a mouse, saying--Be thou a mouse again. Hence I say, a mean man having obtained an exalted post &c.
Moreover, you should not think that this is easy to do. Listen.
Having devoured many fishes of the best, middle and the ordinary sort, a crane died afterwards through excessive greed,
