;hitoeng085.txt

85
A messenger, does not speak otherwise (than directed) although weapons be raised against him. Moreover,
Who believes in his own inferiority or his enemy's superiority from the words of a messenger? For, from his nature of not being punishable by death, a messenger speaks anything and everything.
On hearing this the king and the crow were pacified (lit. were themselves again). The parrot, too, got up and went away. He was, however, brought back by Chakravaka, and after matters had been explained to him, was presented with gold ornaments and the like and dismissed, upon which he departed. The parrot having returned to the Vindhya mountain paid his respects to his sovereign. Seeing him the king Chitravarna asked him-What is the news? What sort of country is that?
The parrot replied--
Sire, in brief this is the news. Let preparations be made for war. As for the country of Karpuradvipa, it is (as it were) a part of heaven; how can it be possible to describe it? The King, on hearing this, sammoned all the principal persons together and sat down to deliberate with them. Said he--With reference to the war presently to be carried on, advise me as to what is proper to be done. As for war it is absolutely determined upon. For it is said:--
Brahmanas are ruined when discontented, and kings when contented, a harlot full of modesty is ruined and so are ladies of family, if without modesty.
[Page 74]
The vulture named Duradarsi (Far-seeing) observed--My lord it is not advisable to enter upon war under adverse circumstances, For,
When one's friends, ministers and allies are deeply attached, and of the enemy the reverse of this (i. e. disaffected with their sovereign), then only should war be made. Moreover,
(The acquisition of) land, an ally and gold--these three are the benefits accruing from war; when these can be counted upon as sure then only war should be made.
The King observed? Let the minister first inspect my forces, so that it may be known how far they will be useful. Similarly, let the astrologer be called who will determine and tell us the lucky time for starting. The minister--Still, to begin the expedition all at once is not advisable. For,
