;hitoeng117.txt

117
penance-grove to him, with passions subdued, who proceeds in an act which is irreproachable. For,
An afflicted man, in whatever Asrama (stage of life) he may choose to be, should do the duties of religion, treating all creatures equally: external signs (such as bearing the holy staff, wearing dyed garments &c.) are not the cause of the performance of religious rites. – 90.
It is also said--
Those, who eat just to support life, lead a married life for progeny, and have speech but to declare the truth, surmount difficulties.
So also,
[Page 100]
The soul is a river which has self-restraint for its holy stairs, truthfulness for its water, good disposition for its banks and mercy for its waves : bathe in this river, O son of Pandu : the inner soul is not purified by (physical) water. More especially,
He enjoys happiness who renounces this exceedingly worthless worldly life which is overwhelmed with the pains of birth, death, old age and diseases. For,
Pain is the real thing (existing in this world), and not happiness, since that is observed : the term happiness is applied to the removal of the pain) of one afflicted with sorrow.
Kaundinya said--Just so. Then the Brahmana, afflicted with sorrow, cursed me, saying--'From to-day thou shalt be the carrier of serpents.' Kapila said--Now you are incapable of listening to advice. Your heart is heavy with grief. Still, hear what is fit to be done.
Association (with other persons) should be given up by all means; if it cannot be given up it should be made with the good; for the company of the good is a medicine (for the disease of attachment to worldly things). Moreover,
Desire should be abandoned by overy effort; if it cannot be abandoned, it should be entertained with respect to final emancipation; for such a desire is the medicine for (removing) it (desire in general).
On hearing this, that Kaundinya, the fire of whose sorrow was extinguished by the water of Kapila's advice, became an ascetic (lit. took the holy staff). So, owing to the Brahmana's curse, I lie here to carry the frogs.
