;hitoeng095.txt

05
What good can science do to him who is himself wanting in talent? Of what service is a lamp to him who has no eyes?
For this reason I too remained quiet. Upon this the king said with folded hands--Sir, let this my fault be connived at. Now instruct me in such a way that having returned with the remnant of my forces I shall go back to the mountain Vindhya. The Vulture said to himself--This must be remedied. For,
In the case of deities, one's preceptor, cows, kings, Brahmanas, as also children, old men and sickly persons, anger should always be restrained. – 120
The minister having smiled said--Fear not my lord. Take heart. Listen, my lord--
The talent of ministers is tested (or, is exhibited) when a plan fails (or, when an alliance is broken), and that of physicians in disease wherein all the three humours are most malignantly disturbed: for who is not wise when all goes on smoothly? Moreover,
Little minds attempt little and are greatly embarrassed; while men of firm minds undertake great things and remain undisturbed.
Having therefore stormed the (enemy's) castle I will take you, in a short time, to the Vindhya mountain, accompanied with glory and power. The king asked--How can this be achieved now with the small force (at our command)? The Valture said-My lord, everything will be accomplished. Because in the case of a conqueror promptness of action is the guarantee for the accomplishment of success. Let the gates of the castle then be blocked up at once. After this, the spy, crane came to Hiranyagarbha and told him--Sire, king Chitravarna relying on the advice of the Vulture, small as his army, is, is going to blockade the castle-gates. The royal Swan said--Sarvajna, what is to be done now? Chakravaka replied--Let the discrimination of strong and weak men in our army be made. On that being known let presents of gold, garments and the like be made, as marks of royal favour, according to merit. For,
[Page 83]
The goddess of wealth never leaves him, the lion among kings, who saves even a cowri from being ill-spent, as if it were worth a thousand coins of gold, but spends in crores with a liberal hand on proper occasions. Again,
