;hitoeng061.txt

61
in a passion--Go quickly and show the vile wretch to me. Where does the villain live? Then the hare taking the lion with him set out to show him a deep well. Please Your Highness, come here and behold him yourself.' With these words he showed him the lion's own reflection in the water of the well. Thereupon he, being swollen with rage, sprang upon him through arrogagance and lost his life. Therefore I say, he who has talent has strength &c. The female crow said I have heard everything Now tell me what I am to do. The crow replied--The prince comes every day and bathes in the adjacent tank. Hold up in your bill a gold necklace, which is taken off from his person at the time of bathing and placed on a stone of the flight of steps, and put it in this hollow. Now on one occasion when the prince had entered the water for bathing, the female crow did what she was directed to do. Then by the servants of the prince who followed the track of the gold necklace, the serpent was seen and killed. Hence I say--What is possible to be accomplished
by means of a remedy &c. Karataka said--If it is so, you may
[Page 53]
May your efforts be crowned with suocess! Then Damanaka went to Pingalaka, bowed, and said--Please Your Highness, I have come here perceiving that some calamity, leading to great disaster, is imminent, For,
A well-meaning man should give his wholesome counsel even unasked, in the case of a calamity, when a man swerves from the right path, or when the time of taking action is passing away. Again,
The proper sphere of the king is to enjoy pleasures, while that of the minister is to attend to business. A minister who spoils the business of state is to blame in every way.
This is the proper duty of ministers--
Better is the abandonment of life or the cutting off of the head than the neglect of one who desires to commit the sin of obtaining his master's post.
Pingalaka asked him graciously--Now what do you wish to say? Damanaka replied--My lord, Samjivaka appears to be acting in an unbecoming manner towards Your Highness. To speak clearly, he, having cast reproach on Your Highness' three powers, wishes to gain the sovereignty itself. On hearing that Piigalaka stood quite full of wonder mingled with fear. Damanaka observed again--My lord, that Your Highness, having
