;hitoeng049.txt

49
Men are of three sorts, O king, viz., the best, the lowest and the middling : one should appoint them accordingly to three kinds of employment.-70.
Since,
Servants and ornaments ought to be set on their proper places : for, a crest-jewel is not worn on the foot or a foot-ornament on the head. Moreover,
If a gem fit to be get in a gold ornament is set on tin, it does not cry, nor does it* not shine there: the person setting it there, however, is exposed to censure. Again,
A piece of glass is set in a diadem and a jewel placed in a foot-ornament : the blame does not lie with the gem, but it is the want of discretion on the part of the setter. See,
A king who knows how to discriminate between servants--e.g., this is talented, this is attached to me, this is brave, while there is danger from this--is surrounded to fullness by servants. So also,
A horse, a weapon, a text of holy law, a lute, speech, a man and a woman, turn out fit or unfit according to the particular man they come in contact with.
What is the use of a servant, who, though devoted, is without ability or of one who is able but doing harm?
It does not behove you, o king, to despise me, who am both devoted and able. For,
By being despised by a king the servants - turn ont dullheaded; then on account of their predominance no wise man approaches him; when the kingdom is abandoned by wise men, policy does not become efficacious; and policy having failed the 
[Page 43]
whole world falls a helpless victim to misery. Moreover,
People always honour the man respected by the king, but he who is despised by the king is slighted by all. And further,
Wise men should accept what is well said even by a child; is not the light of a lamp acceptable when (or where) the sun is not shining ?
Pingalaka said--Dear Damanaka, why do you talk so? You, the son of our prime minister, did not come here for so long a time believing in the words of some rogue. Now freely say your say. Damanaka said--Lord, I have a question to ask.
* If the reading besi # THÀ omit 'not'.
