; hitoeng008.txt

that a tiger eats men is difficult to be avoided (lit., warded off). For,
People, who are the blind followers of one another, regard not a preaching bawd as an authority in religious matters, as they do a Brahmana although (he happens to be) a cow-killer.
; -10
I, on my part, have studied the codes of religious law. Hear me.
O son of Pandu, as is a shower of rain to the Maru (desert) land, or food to one afflicted with hunger, so is a gift to the poor, full of fruit.
As life is dear to oneself so it is to (other) creatures. The good show pity to creatures by comparing (them) to themselves. Moreover,
In refusing and giving, in pleasure and pain, and in things (or acts) agreeable and disagreeable, a man knows the standard (of action) by self-comparison. Also,
He, who looks upon another's wife as a mother, another's wealth as a clod of earth, and upon all creatures as his own self, is a (truly) wise man.
You are in hard distress (lit., extremely ill-situated) and hence I am endeavouring to give it to you.
Enrich the poor, O son of Kunti ; bestow not wealth upon the rich; medicine is wholesome to him who is diseased; what need of medicine has he that is whole ? And again,
A gift, which is given for the sake of charity, to one who is not a benefactor (or who cannot make a return for it), and in the proper place, at the proper time and to a proper recipient is, (the sages) consider, a gift of the best sort.
Therefore, bathe in this lake and accept this gold bracelet. Thereupon, placing confidence in his words, no sooner did the traveller enter the lake for bathing than he stuck in deep mud and was unable to run away. The tiger seeing him plunged into the mire said -- Ha, thou art fallen into deep mud. I will lift thee out of it. Saying so he approached him gently : and the traveller being seized by the tiger reflected --
That he reads the texts of religious law or studies the Vedas, is no reason why confidence should be reposed in a villain : it is the nature that predominate in such a case : just as by nature the milk of cows is sweet.
