;hitoeng099.txt

99
The king, the ministry, the country, the forts, the treasure, the army, the allies, the subjects (in general) and the orders of citizens are the essential constituents of a kingdom.
My lord, you are the master, and must be saved by every means. For,
The subjects when abandoned by the king cannot live, though prosperous : What can a physician do, although he be a Dhanvantari, to one whose life is spanned? Moreover,
When the lord of men perishes, the world of mortals also perishes, and when he rises it rises, even as a lotus fades when the sun sets and blooms when he rises.
By this time the Cock came and inflicted very severe wounds on the royal Swan's body with his claws. Thereupon the Sarasa quickly coming up screened the king with his own body. Thereafter the Sarasa, although overwhelmed with the strokes given by the Cock with his nails and bill, protected the king with his body and threw him into water with a push; and then slew the Cock, the general, with a stroke of his bill. Afterwards the Sarasa, too, was killed by many (attacking him) in a body. Now king Chitravarna entered the castle, caused the things in it to be taken away, and being hailed by bards singing the panegyrics of his victory, went back to his army.
Now the princes observed--In that army of the king that Sarasa alone was meritorious who saved his master by sacrificing his own body. For it is said--
All cows bring forth calves that have the shape of the cowkind: but some one alone produces one, the master of a herd (the best of bulls), having stout and muscular shoulders (lit., having shoulders that are rubbed against by his horns).
Vishnusarma said--May he, the magnanimous one, enjoy the blessings of heaven, having the females of the Vidyadharas as his attendants. For it is said--
Those brave men, devoted to their master and grateful, who sacrifice their lives for their master, go to heaven.
[Page 86]
Wherever a brave man is killed, surrounded by his enemies, he obtains the eternal worlds, if he does not show weakness (cowardice in battle).
You have heard (all that relates to) War. The princes said--We have heard it and become happy. Vishnusarma said--Let there be this much more also:
