;hitoeng115.txt

115
He is a relative who stands by one in a battle, in adversity, in times of famine, when a kingdom is subverted, at the royal gate, and in the cemetery.
Among them, one Kapila by name, who had just finished his course of Vedic stadies, said--Oh Kaundinya, your reason is gone and hence you lament thus. Hear--
[Page 98]
Since Frailty, like a midwife, takes on her lap a creature that is born first, and the mother afterwards, what occasion is there for sorrow?
Where are those potentates gone, with their armies, bodyguards and equipages, the witness of whose exit (from her), the Earth stands as yet? Moreover,
The body is liable to accidents (lit. has accidents near to it), wealth is the abode of misfortunes, and unions are followed by separations—overything created is fragile. - 70.
The body, decaying every moment, is not observed (to do so), but is perceived when dead like a raw earthen pot placed in water when dissolved.
Death approaches a creature nearer and nearer every day, just as it does at every step of the man who is being conducted to the place of execution.
Transient are youth, beauty, life, hoarded wealth, progperity and the company of beloved persons: a wise man should not allow himself to be deluded by them.
Just as two pieces of wood come together on the surface of the ocean, and, having met, part again, so (of a similar nature) is the association of creatures (they come together only to part again).
As some traveller halts under a shade, and having taken rest proceeds on his journey again, such is the company of creatures. Again,
When the body which is composed of the five elements is reduced to those five again, each component part being resolved into its original element, where is the room for wailing?
As many darts of sorrow are driven into a man'a heart as the number of connexions, delightful to the heart, he forms.
An eternal association, even with one's own body, is not obtained by any one; how little then with anything else?
Moreover,
Connexion certainly indicates the possibility of separation, as birth indicates the coming of death which is unavoidable.
