;hitoeng080.txt

80
there so that we may know of their doings as well as their strength and weaknees. For,
A spy is the eye of a king in the determinatior of what policy to pursue or what to abandon with regard to his own kingdom or that of his enemies: he who has it not is quite blind.
Let him, too, take with him a second person worthy of oonfidence, so that himself staying there he might very secretly ascertain the secret measures adopted by the enemy there, and having communicated the same to him, would send him here. For it is said
(A king ) should hold discourse with his spies gathered under the disguise of ascetics at some holy place or a hermitage or a temple with the (outward) object of learning the truths of the sastras.
A secret spy is one who can move in water or on land. Let that very crane, therefore be appointed. Let some such other crane go with him as his companion; and let the members of their families stay at the royal gate. But my lord, all thiş should be done, with the profoundest secrecy. For,
Counsel when reaching six years (if heard by a third person) leaks out as well as that got by hearsay: wherefore a king should deliberate with himself as the second (i. e. with his minister alone). Observe,
The evils resulting to a king from his counsels getting out are not capable of being remedied-such is the opinion of those who are versed in politics.
The king after reflecting--I have got the best emissary.
The minister--Then success in battle too is got.
Just then the door-keeper, having entered, said after bowing--Sire, a parrot who has come from Jambudvipa is waiting at the door. The king looked at Chakravaka. Chakravaka said--let him first go to the residence prepared for him and
[Page 70]
wait there. We shall send for him afterwards and grant him an interview. The door-keeper took the parrot to the residence and departed. The king--As for war it is imminent. Chakravaka--Still to go to war all at once is no wise policy. For,
Is he a servant or a counsellor, who, without due consideration, advises his sovereign at the outset to prepare for war or to quit his land? Moreover,
One should try to put down an enemy but never by means of fight: for victory in the case of combatants is always certain. Again,
