;hitoeng042.txt

42
For, we, who have been long despised by this king without any fault of ours, have suffered great anguish.
See what servants who wish to acquire wealth by means of service have done :—those fools have allowed even the independence of their body to be lost! Moreover,
A wise man will practise penance and be happy with even a portion of those sufferings caused by cold, wind and heat which those who are dependent on others undergo. Again,
The fruitfulness of life lies in this much, that one lives a life of independence: if those who are in a state of dependence (be said to) live, then, who are the dead ?
Come, go away, fall down, rise, speak, observe silence--thus do the wealthy sport with those who are in the grip of the evil spirit of desire.
Fools, like harlots, for the sake of pelf, deck their persons again and again and make them subservient to others. Again,
Servants esteem highly even that glance of their master which is naturally unsteady and falls even on an impious person. Another consideration is this--
If he (a servant) is silent, he is considered to be) stupid; if clever in talking, crazy-headed or garrulous; if forbearing, timid, if he does not bear tamely, mostly he is (set down as) not well-born; if he stands by the side of his master), he is audacious; but if he stands at a distance, he is not bold: the duties of servitude are extremely abstruse-not to be known even by sages having mystic powers. More especially,
[Page 36]
He bends down that he should rise, sacrifices life that he should live, and exposes himself to misery that he should be happy--who else is a fool than a servant?
Damanaka said--Friend, you should not entertain such a thought even in the mind. For,
How are great kings not to be served with effort (diligence), who, when pleased, grant desires in a short time? (i.e. they must be served by all means). Considder this much more--
Whence can those, who are out of service, have riches with chamaras waved over them, a white umbrella with a prominent staff and a train of servants with horses and elephants?
Karataka replied-Still what have we to do with this affair? For, one should by all means avoid meddling with affairs with which one has nothing to do. See,
