;hitoeng102.txt

102
found out by smelling his mouth that he eats camphor, having stolen it. For it is said--
The eating capacity of women (lit. food--as compared to that of men) is said to be twofold, their talent fourfold, their energy sixfold and their passion eightfold.
Hearing those words (of the woman) the servant getting angry said-Who can stay in the house of a master whose wife is of this sort house wherein the mistress smells the mouth of a servant every moment? Saying this he got up and walked off. The merchant with great difficulty persuaded him and retained him in his service. Hence I say-He is really talented who counteracts &c. Thereafter Yadbhavishya said--
[Page 88]
What is not to happen can never happen and what is to happen can never be otherwise: Why is this medicine, which destroys the poison of anxiety, not drunk?
Then in the morning Pratyutpannamati, being caught in the net, feigned himself dead and go remained. Thereafter being removed from the net he jumped to the utmost of his power and entered deep water. While Yadbhavishya being caught by the fishermen was killed. Hence I say--Anagatavidhata &c. Therefore so contrive it that I shall get to another pond to-day. The two geese said--You will be safe when another pond is reached. But what will be your means of safety (or, how will you fare) while going on land? The tortoise replied--Contrive that means by which I shall be able to go along with you by the aerial path. The two geese said--How can such a contrivance be possible? The tortoise replied--
You take in your beaks a piece of wood which I will seize by my mouth, so that I too shall go with ease by the force of your wings. The two geese said--This contrivance is possible. But,
While thinking out a remedy a wise man should also take into account accident (or, possible hindrances, obstacles): the young of a foolish crane were eaten by mungooses before his very eyes. -10.
The tortoise asked how it was. The two geese thus narrated--
FABLE IV.
There is in the Northern country a mountain Gridhrakuta by name. There in a fig tree on the bank of the Airavati lived
