;hitoeng021.txt

And what other friend than yourself, endowed with these qualities, can I find ? Hearing these his words and such others, Hiranyaka stepped out and said --
I am exhilarated by this nectar of your speech (lit. I am fattened by you by &c.); as it is observed :
Not a bath with very cool water, not a necklace of pearls, not (even) sandal-wood-pigment applied to each and every limb, delights a man, oppressed with heat, so much, as the words of the good, uttered with affection, advanced with wise arguments (or full of wise thoughts) and comparable to (fascinating like) the charm of attraction, have power over (are able to gratify) the mind of the virtuous. Again, 
;-98. 
[Page 18]
 Divulging a secret, begging, hard-heartedness, fickleness of mind, anger, faithlessness and gambling --these are the faults in a friend.
Following the order of (the faults mentioned in) this speech, not a single fault is found in you. For,
Cleverness and truthfulness are known in the course of conversation; while activity and absence of rashness are known from actual experience. Moreover,
Of quite a different sort (from that of a deceitful person) is the friendship of one whose mind is pure: while quite in a different direction (from real action) proceed the words of one whose mind is affected with deceit.
There is one thing in mind, another in speech and a third in deed of the vile-minded, while there is one thing in mind, the same in speech and the same in action of the magnanimous.
Therefore let your wish be done. Having said so, Hiranyaka formed friendship with the crow, pleased him with choice eatables and entered his hole. The crow, too, repaired to his residence. Thenceforward the two passed their time in making presents of food to each other, in inquiries after good health and in confidential discourses.
Once Laghupatanaka said to Hiranyaka -- Friend, it is very hard to get food in this place. I wish, therefore, to go to some other place. Hiranyaka said -- Where can we go to? For it is said --
A talented man walks with one foot, and stops with the other: one should not leave one's old abode without examining carefully the new one.

