;hitoeng082.txt

82
For,
A single bowman standing on the battlement can fight a hundred, and, a hundred a hundred thousand : hence a fortress is set down as necessary. -50.
The territory of what king which is without strongholds is not liable to be conquered by the enemy? A king who has no fortress is helpless like a man fallen overboard.
One should build a castle with a large trench, furnished with lofty battlements, having machines, and a good supply of water and situated in a place sarrounded by hills, rivers and deserts.
Spaciousness, extreme difficulty of access (lit. ruggedness of the ground), a large store of water, grain and fuel and the means of ingress and egress-these seven are the precious possessions of a fort.
The king--Who should be entrusted with the work of getting the fortress ready? Chakravaka said--
One should employ a man in that business in which he is skilled. He who has no practical knowledge of a work gets bewildered (when set to it), although well versed in science.
Let Sarasa be called then. That being done, when Sarasa came the king looked at him and said--Sarasa, quickly attend to the fitting up of a fortress. Sarasa replied after bowing--
As for a fortress, Sire, I have long well marked this large lake as such; only let a stock of provisions be ordered to be laid up in the island which is in its centre. For,
The store of grains, O king, is the best of all stores; because
a jewel put into the mouth cannot support life.
Moreover,
[Page 72]
Of all spiced things salt is known to be the best : for a condiment taken without it tastes like cowdung (is quite insipid).
The king--Go and attend to everything with despath. The door-keeper having entered again--Sire, a crow, Meghavarna (cloud-colour) by name, who has come from Ceylon, is waiting at the gate with his retinue and wishes to see Your Majesty's feet. The king--A crow again knows everything and has a wide range of observation and is, for this reason, worthy of being retained. Chakravaka observed--Sire, this may be. But the
* By writers on military science.
