;hitoeng035.txt

35
Therefore, whatever the lord of my life orders me to do, I do without questioning (its propriety). The messenger asked--Is this the truth? Lavanyavati replied--Beyond doubt this is the truth. Then the messenger went back and reported all that to Tungabala. Having heard it Tungabala observed--How can this be possible that the husband would bring her here and offer her to me? The go-between said--Let a device be used. For it is said--
That which can be achieved by means of a device cannot be accomplished by valour: An elephant was killed by a jackal going over a miry way. The prince asked how it was. She related--
FABLE VIII.
There was an elephant, named Karpuratilaka in Brahmaranya. On seeing him all the jackals thought to themselves--if by some means this can die, his body will afford us sufficient food for four months. Then an old jackal from among them declared I will bring about his death by the power of my intellect. Then the wily fellow having gone to Karpuratilaka and bowed to him touching the ground with the eight parts of his body said--My lord, favour me with a glance. The elephant asked--Who art thou? Whence art thou come? He replied--I am a jackal and sent to Your Honour's presence by all the inhabitants of the forest having assembled together (to say):--Since it is not expendient to live without a king Your Honour has been selected, as possessed of all kingly qualities, to be installed king of the forest. For,
He, who is extremely pure as regards his family, nobility and conduct, is chivalrous, pious, and versed in politics, is worthy of being a king on earth. Moreover,
One should first obtain a king, then a wife and then wealth: in the absence of a king, whence can there be wife or wealth? Again,
Like rain, the lord of the earth is the support of creatures : life can be sustained, however, even when there is scarcity of rain, but not in the absence of a king. Moreover,
In this interdependent world a man keeps within the bounds of duty mostly through the dread of punishment; a man of good conduct is difficult to be found and it is through the fear of punishment also, that a woman of good family ap-
