endowed with all princely qualities. That king once heard a couple of Slokas (stanzas) chanted by some one ; (viz.)
He who does not possess (a knowledge of) Sastra, the universal eye, which totally removes various doubts and discusses things hidden from view, is surely blind. -10
Youth, abundance of wealth, sovereignty and inconsiderateness are the source of calamity even singly; what then, where all these four are combined !
On hearing this, the king, who was distracted at heart, on account of the non-attendance to (the commands of the) Sastras of his sons who had no knowledge of the Sastras and who always followed the wrong path, thought to himself:
What is the good of (what benefit can accrue from) having a son who is neither learned nor pious (dutiful); (for) what is the use of an eye that is blind? It simply causes occular pain.
Of sons, not born, (born and) dead and foolish, the first two are to be preferred and not the last: (for) the first two cause pain (but) once ; the last at every step. Moreover,
He is (really) born by whose birth the family is exalted. In this revolving world who does not die and is not born again?
If the mother of the boy, for whom the little finger does not bend down hastily at the commencement of the enumeration of the number of meritorious men, be said to have given birth to a son, then say, what a barren woman would be like to (i.e., she is as good as a barren woman).
He, who is not well known for his charity, penance, bravery, learning and the acquisition of wealth, is but the excrement of his mother. Also,
It is better to have one meritorious son than a hundred of foolish ones; the single moon dispels darkness; and not the whole firmament of stars.
The son of him, who has practised religious austerities, extremely difficult to perform, at some holy place, will be obedient, prosperous, righteous and talented.
An influx of money, constant health (lit., freedom from disease), a beloved wife, and one sweet-speaking (of gentle manners), an obedient son, and learning productive of wealth -- these six, o king, are the pleasures of the mortal world. 
[Page 3]
Who will be (considered) blessed by having sons who are like (no better than, the adhakas* (a kind of measure) filling up
** i.e., Simply making up a particular number.
