;hitoeng019.txt

One should not form friendship or feel affection for a wicked man: a charcoal, when alive, burns; when cold, it soils the hand.
Or rather, such is the settled course of conduct of the wicked.
First he falls at the feet and then bites the back; gradually he sings wonderfully some sweet indistinct hum into the ear; and having noticed some hole (a weak point) he at once enters it (takes advantage of it) fearlessly : -(thus) does a gnat imitate all the actions of wicked man.
That a wicked man speaks sweetly is no reason why confidence should be reposed in him : (for) on the tip of his tongue there is honey, but in his heart the deadliest poison.
Then at dawn, the crow observed the owner of the field coming towards the place, stick in hand. On seeing him the crow said -- Friend deer, feign yourself dead, fill your belly with wind and so remain, with your legs stiffened. When I make a noise, you shall get up and bound off quickly.
Following the advice of the crow, the deer stood in that posture. Now the master of the field saw the deer in that condition, his eyes beaming with joy. Saying "Ah, thou art dead of thyself", he released him from confinement and was busied in collecting his nets. Then hearing the sound of the crow, the deer quickly got up and ran away, while the jackal was killed by the stick flung at him (the deer) by the owner of the field. For it is said
In three years, or three months, or three fortnights, or (even) in three days, a man reaps the fruit of his good or bad actions when reaching their extreme.
Hence I say "Friendship between the victim and the eater &c." The crow observed again,
Even though I eat you I shall not get ample food; but if you live, I live, O sinless one, like Chitragriva. Again,
Confidence (in one another) is observed even amongst those lower animals whose actions are invariably (wholly) good : for the disposition of the good ever remains true to (lit. does not vary from) their inborn goodness. Moreover,
The mind of a good man, although made to fly into a great passion, is not affected (by anger); it is not possible to heat the water of the sea with a torch of straw. 
; 87

