;hitoeng028.txt

28
What is a man's (true) duty in this world? Compassion to creatures. What is (real) happiness? Health (lit. freedom from disease). What is affection? Good feeling. And
what is wisdom? Decision. Similarly,
[Page 23]
When misfortunes assail (a man), wisdom lies in (quickly) coming to a decision; misfortunes at every step overtake those who cannot arrive at a decision. Moreover,
One should abandon one person to save a family, a family to save a village, and a village to save a country; but for the sake of one's own self, one should abandon the whole world, Again, - 150.
Of the two--water obtained with ease (lit. without trouble) and delicious food attended with fear, on consideration, I find, indeed, that to be conducive to happiness, wherein lies ease.
Having thus reflected I came to a dreary forest. For,
Better is a forest, haunted by tigers and lordly elephants, wherein the trees serve as a home, ripe fruits and water as food, grass as a bed and barks as garments, than a life without wealth among relatives.
Then by the manifestation of the fruit of my religious merit, I was favoured with friendly intercourse by this friend. And now, by a further continuation of merit, I have got your company, which is heaven itself. For,
Of the poisonous tree of worldly existence, two fruits only have a flavoury juice (are sweet); viz. the testing of the nectar of poetry and the society of the good.
Manthara said--
Riches are comparable to (as unsteady as) the dust of the feet; youth flies away with the rapidity of a mountain river; life is as fleeting as a rolling drop of water, and existence as evanascent as foam; (such being the case) he, who, with his judgment deprived, does not perform his religious duties, which unfasten the bolt of the gate of heaven, being overtaken by old age and full of contrition, is burnt by the fire of sorrow.
[Page 24] 
You laid up too large a hoard; and this ill consequence was the result of that. Hear,
To spend in charity is just to save the money that is acquired, as an outlet is, in the case of water stored up in the bowels of a tank, (the only way to preserve it in a good condition). Moreover,
