;hitoeng059.txt

59
EFABLE VI. 
The wife of a certain cowherd who lived in Dvaraka was of a bad character. She had an intrigue with the magistrate of the place, as also with his son. For it is said--
[Page 51]
Fire is not satisfied with fuel, the ocean with rivers, the god of death with all creatures and a beautiful woman with men. Moreover,
Not by gifts, not by honour, not by simplicity, not by attendance, not with a weapon (fear of punishment) and not with scriptural advice, can women be won over:—they are hard to please in every way. For,
Having forsaken a husband who is the abode of merits, endowed with fame, amiable, versed in the erotic art, wealthy and youthful, women quickly resort to another man (although) destitute of character, good qualities and the like. Moreover,
A woman does not derive that pleasure although lying down on a beautiful bed entirely to her satisaction as she does in the company of a gallant although lying down on the ground covered over with the Durva grass and other things of that sort
One day she was sporting with the magistrate's son, when the magistrate too came there to enjoy her company. Seeing him coming, she put his son in a barn and began to amuse herself with him. After that her husband, the cowherd, returned from the cowpen. On spying him the cowherdess said to the magistrate-you take a stick and quickly go out as if in a rage. He having acted ancordingly the cowherd came in and asked his wife what had brought the justice there. She replied--For some reason or other he is angry with his son, who coming here entered our house and was protected by me by being concealed in the barn. His father searching for him did not find him in the house. Hence it is that the magistrate is going in a rage. She then took out the son from the barn and showed him. So it is said--
The food of women is twofold, their readiness of wit fourfold, perseverance sixfold and passion eightfold.
Therefore I say-'He, whose intellect does not fail him. &c.' Karataka observed-Be it so. But how will it be possible to dissolve the great friendship that has grown up between them by the similarity of their dispositions? Damanaka replied--Let a remedy be applied. For it is said--
