;hitoeng069.txt

69
When a wise man sees no benefit accruing to himself from not fighting, he dies fighting the foe.
[Page 60]
In case of victory, he (a warrior) obtains fortune; if he dies, a heavenly damsel: when the bodies are perishable in a moment, what hesitation should there be about dying in battle? -170.
Having pondered thus, Samjivaka said--Friend, how am I to know that he is bent on (lit., desirous of) killing me? Damanaka replied - When he, with his tail erect, his (fore)-paws lifted up and his mouth wide open, will look at you, you too should display your prowess. For,
To whom is a man, powerful yet void of fire (spirit, energy) not an object of contempt? Lo, people fearlessly set their foot upon a heap of ashes.
But all this must be done with the strictest privacy; otherwise, not you, not I (i. e., it will be all over with us both). Having said these things Damanaka went to Karataka.
Karataka asked him--What is the outcome (of your efforts)? Damanaka replied--A reciprocal breach (of friendship) has been effected as intended. Karataka observed--What doubt can there be as to that! For,
Who, possibly, is a friend of the wicked? Who will not get angry when pressed with great importunity? Who does not become proud on account of wealth, and who is not clever in doing an evil deed? Moreover,
A wealthy man is led into vice by artful men for self-aggrandizement: what mischief does not the company of villains do, like fire?
Damanaka then repaired to Pingalaka, and saying--My lord, the villain (lit., the vile intentioned one) is coming; do you therefore prepare yourself and wait—he made him assume the attitude described before. Samjivaka too, on coming there, saw the lion with altered features in that way and displayed his valour in a manner worthy of himself. Then in the fierce battle that ensued Samjivaka was killed by the lion.
Now Pingalaka, after he had slain Samjivaka and taken rest, stood like one sorrow-smitten and said--What a cruel deed have I done! For,
When a king transgresses his duty, his kingdom is enjoyed by others; while he himself is the abode of sin, like a lion that kills an elephant.*
The lion kills the elephant and remains guilty of the murder, while the tusks and bones of the elephant are obtained by others.
