;hitoeng025.txt

25
Seeing that embrace a procuress that stood by said to herself "She has embraced him all of a sudden!' Then that procuress, having ascertained the cause, punished that Lilavati with a secret fine. Hence I say The youthful wife having suddenly seized her old husband &c.' There must be some cause in this case which keeps up the strength of this mouse. After a moment's thought the recluse said-And the cause must be abundance of money. For,
In this world every man of wealth is, everywhere and at all times, powerful; even the supreme power of kings has
wealth for its cause.
[Page 21]
Then he took a spade and having dug out my burrow, took away my long-hoarded wealth. Thenceforward, deprived of my strength, without spirit and energy, and unable to earn even my own food, I was observed by Chudakarna, moving along slowly and with trepidation. Then he observed--
In this world a man becomes powerful by wealth, and by wealth also he becomes (is considered) learned. Look at this wicked mouse reduced to the level of his kind. Moreover,
All the actions of a man of little intellect, if void of wealth, die away (prove fruitless) like small streams in summer.
Again,
He who has wealth has friends; he who has wealth has kinsmen; he who has wealth is a man in this world, and he who has wealth is a learned man. Also,
The house of the sonless is void, and so is of one who has no good friend; all the quarters are void to a fool, but all is void to poverty. And again,
His limbs uninjured are the same; his name is the same ; his intellect unimpaired is the same; his words the same; and the man also the same; and yet, when deprived of the warmth of money, he becomes quite a different man in a moment; this is strange!
Having heard all this I thought to myself:--Now my residence here is improper; and as to my communicating this matter to another, that too is not proper. For,
A wise man should not give out the loss of wealth, mental anxiety, the misdeeds in the house, his being deceived and his humiliation. Moreover, - 130.
