;hitoeng083.txt

83
crow is a land-bird and is consequently set on the side of our enemies. How should he be admitted, then? For it is said--
That fool, who deserting his own side is attached to the enemy's party, is killed by the enemies, like the jackal with the blue colour.
The king asked how it was. The minister related--
FABLE VII.
A certain jackal that lived in a forest, fell, while wandering on the borders of a town, into an indigo-pot. Thereupon, not being able to get out of it, he feigned himself dead in the morning and so remained. Now the master of the indigo-pot, taking him to be dead, lifted him out of it, and carrying him to a distance, cast him off, whence he ran off. Then on going into the forest, and finding himself turned blue, he thus meditated--I have now got the best colour. Why should I not, then, secure my own exaltation? Having thus cogitated he called together the jackals and said I am installed king of the forest by the revered goddess of the woods with her own hands being anointed with the juice of the sarvaushadhi. Hence, from to-day all business should be carried on in the forest according to my orders. The jackals on their part, observing that he possessed the particular colour, prostrated themselves before him and said--It will be as Your Majesty commando. In the same way his sovereignty was gradually established over the other tenants of the forest. Thereafter being surrounded by his brethren he attained supreme power. After a while, having obtained servants of superior rank ench as the tiger, the lion and the like, he was ashamed to find the jackals in the court and discarded them with scorn. Then, finding the jackals dejected, an old jackal thus declared himself--Do not be sorry. Since by him who does not know his interest, we, who are well versed in policy and know his weak points, have been dismissed from his presence, that must be done by which he will perish. For these (nobler animals) the tiger and others, deceived by him mere colour and not recognizing him as a jackal consider him their king. Act, therefore, in such a way that he will be found out. To this end this should be done. That at the evening time you shall, all of you, set up a loud yell simultaneously in his hearing (lit. near him); so that on hearing that howl, he too following the natural disposition of his species, will utter a cry.
