;hitoeng091.txt

91
Saktidhara's mother remarked-If this is not to be done, then by what other act can a return be made for the high salary paid in gold? Having thus deliberated they all went to the temple of Sarvamangala. There having offered worship to the goddess, Viravara said–-goddess, be propitiated. May the great king Sudraka be ever triumphant (prosper)! Accept this offering. With these words he cut off his son's head. Then Viravara thought to himself-As for the salary received from the king, it has been repaid. Now that I have become sonless, life is but a mockery (miserable) with me. Thinking so he cut off his own head. Then his wife, too, being oppressed with grief for her husband and son, did the same. Having heard and seen all that, the king, filled with astonishment, said to himself--
Insignificant creatures, like myself, live and die: but there never has been nor will ever be, in this world, one like unto him.
So I shall have nothing to do with my kingdom, which is deserted by him. Then the sword was raised by Sudraka also to lop off his head. Now the goddess Sarvamangala, appearing in a visible form, seized the king by the hand and said--Son, I am pleased with thee. Desist from this adventure. Thy kingdom is secure even after thy death. The king prostrating himself before her said--O goddess, of what use is kingdom to me or what have I to do with life? If you wish to take compassion upon me, let this Viravara, with his wife and son, live (be reanimated) with the remnant of my life. Or else, I will pursue the course which has fallen to my lot. The goddess said--Son, by this noble generosity of thy heart and thy kindness to thy servants, I am pleased with thee in every way. Go and prosper. Let this prince, too, with his family, revive. With these words the goddess vanished from sight. Thereupon Viravara, being restored to life with his wife and son, went home. The king, too, quickly returned unobserved by them, and having entered the inner apartment of his palace slept as before. Now Viravara, on guard at the door, being again questioned by the king replied--My liege, the woman who was crying disappeared when she saw me. There is no further news. Hearing those words the king was pleased and said in astonishment--How praiseworthy is this magnanimous person! For,
Being generous he should speak sweetly; he should be valiant without boasting; he should be munificent, but without
