;hitoeng016.txt


The good show pity even to creatures devoid of merits: the moon does not, indeed, withhold her light from the pariah's residence. Also,
Fire is the object of worship to the twice-born (Brahmanas), and the Brahmana to the (four) castes; the husband is the only object of adoration to his wife, while a guest is the object of reverence everywhere. 
[Page 14]
 When a guest turns back from a man's house, disappointed in his hopes, he does so, having transferred his sin to him and taken his merit with him. And again,
Evet a low-born person, coming to the house of one of a high caste, should be honoured as he deserves ; (for) a guest represents in himself all the gods.
The vulture said –- The cat is fond of flesh; and the youngs of birds live here: therefore, I say so. The cat, on hearing this, touched the ground and then his ears and said I having learnt the code of religious ordinances and being free from passion have undertaken this arduous vow of the Moon. Although the religious texts disagree with one another (in other respects) they are quite at one in this that abstinence from killing is the highest religious duty. For,
Those men, who are averse to all sort of killing, who bear all things and who are the refuge of all, go to heaven.
Religious merit is the only friend who follows one even in death: everything else goes to destruction along with the body. Moreover,
When one eats the flesh of another, mark the difference between the two -- the one enjoys momentary pleasure; while the other loses his life. Besides,
The agony that a man suffers, at the thought that he has to die, cannot be described by another by guessing. Hear me again,
Who will commit great sin for this accursed belly when it can be filled with herbs growing spontaneously in the forest?
Having thus inspired confidence (in the vulture) the cat abode in the hollow of the tree.
Thereafter, as days passed on, he attacked the young birds, brought them into the hollow and devoured them every day. (Now) an inquiry was set on foot by those birds whose young nestlings were eaten and who being sorrow-stricken were

