;hitoeng119.txt

FABLE XII.
There lived in Ujjayini a Brahmana, named Madhava. His wife who had been brought to bed left the Brahmana in charge of her infant child and went out to bathe. In the meantime the Brahmana received an invitation from the king to receive the presents to be given on the occasion of the Paryana Sraddha. On getting that the Brahmana, being naturally poor, thought to himself-If I do not go quickly some other Brahmana will take the presents. For,
If what is to be taken, what is to be given and what is to be done be not quickly attended to, time saps their best essence. - 104
But there is no one here to take care of the child. What shall I do now? Or why care thus! I will appoint this mungoose here, which has been long tended by me and is just like a son to me, to look after the child, and go. He did so and went away. After he had gone, the mungoose seeing a black serpent crawling to the child, killed it and cut it into pieces. Presently the mungoose, seeing the Brahmana coming, ran to him with its mouth and paws covered with blood and rolled at his feet. Then the Brahmana, seeing it in that condition and concluding that it had eaten the child, killed it. After that as soon as the Brahmana went in and looked at his child, he found it lying down comfortably (quite well), while a serpent lay there killed. Then looking at his mungoose that had done him a service, his heart was pervaded with emotion and he was smitten with bitterest sorrow. Hence I say--'He who without ascertaining the real truth' etc. Moreover,
One should give up the collection of these six, viz., lust, anger, want of judgement, greed, vanity and haughtiness: when these are abandoned a man becomes happy.
The king asked--Minister, is this your resolve? The minister replied--Just so. For,
Remembrance of important (weighty) affairs, clever guessing, decisive knowledge, firmness of purpose and secrecy of counsel are the most important qualities in a minister. Also,
One should not do a thing rashly: want of due consideration is the most favourite abode of misfortunes: riches, of their own accord, seek (lit. choose) him who acts after due deliberation. being attracted by his merit.
[Page 102]
So my lord, if you are to follow my advice you should go after concluding a treaty. For,
