;hitoeng107.txt

107
replied--By means of a scheme devised by Your Excellency. The Vulture said-If my advice is to be followed, then let us go back to our country. Else, after the advent of the rainy season, if the war is renewed with an enemy of equal power, it will be impossible for us, who are stationed in a foreign country, even to return home. So having made peace for the attainment of both prosperity and glory, let us go away. The fortress has already been taken and renown gained. This much is what I approve of. For,
A king has a (true) adviser (lit. helper) in him, who considering his duty as foremost and not minding what his master likes or dislikes, says things which are true although unpalatable.
In a battle both the parties are sometimes ruined; so one should not jeopardize his advantages : thus has Brihaspati declared. Moreover,
Who, that is not an idiot, will risk (lit., place on the swing of doubt) in a battle the army of his allies, his kingdom, his own self, as well as his reputation? Moreover,
[Page 92]
One should desire friendly alliance even with one's equals, since victory in a battle is uncertain : for were not Sunda and Upasunda, of equal valour, destroyed by each other?
The king asked how it was: the minister told (the following tale):
FABLE VIII.
In days of yore, two demons, Sunda and Upasunda by name, who were brothers, with the desire of obtaining the sovereignty of the three worlds, devoted themselves to Siva's worship for a long time, suffering great bodily torment. Then the deity being pleased with them asked them to name the boon they wanted. Now the two, owing to the (influence of) the goddess of learning who had possessed them, gave utterance to quite a different wish from what they had intended to do. They said--If the Almighty God is pleased with us, may he give us his consort Parvati. Then the Deity, although enraged, seeing that the granting of the boon was inevitable, gave Parvati to those fools. Thereupon they two, the destroyers of the world and representing (as it were) sin and darkness (ignorance), being captivated by the excellence of her beauty and mentally yearning after her, began to quarrel,
