;hitoeng037.txt

37
Disregarding those words of friendly counsel, and distraught with great fear, Manthara left the pool and set out for another. They too, Hiranyaka and others, apprehensive of mishap through affection, followed him. Then as he was crawling along the ground, Manthara was seen by a certain huntsman roaming about in the forest. On seeing him he picked him up, and fastened him to his bow, and troubled by thirst and hunger brought on by the fatigue of his wandering about, get out homeward. The deer, the crow and the mouse, plunged in extreme sorrow, followed him. Then Hiranyaka lamented--
Scarcely have I gone to the end of one misfortune, as of the ocean, when another has befallen me: when there are weak points misfortunes multiply (misfortunes come not singly). 
[Page 31]
That natural friend who is obtained simply by good luck and whose affection is sincere (lit. not artificial) does not forsake as even in adversity.
Men havo not that confidence in a mother, wife, brother or son, which they have in a friend by natural disposition.
Thinking (over the matter) thus again and again.--0 misfortune! For,
In this very life have I experienced those changes of condition, like so many births and rebirths, which are the results of a series of my own actions and which are good or bad and happening at stated periods of time.
Or rather it must be just so.
The body is subject to perils (lit. has perils near at hand) riches are the abode of misfortunes; and union is attended with disunion: transient is everything created.
On a second reflection he said--
By whom was created this jewel, viz. 'mitra', consisting of two syllables, which protects from the fear arising from the enemy of sorrow (or from sorrow and an enemy), and which is the abode of delight and confidence ? Moreover, -210.
A friend, who is the elixir of joy to the eyes, the delight of the heart and the sharer of pleasure or pain with his friend, is hard to be found; but those other friends, who, attracted by the lust of riches, gather together in prosperity, are found everywhere: adversity is the touch-stone on which to test their sincerity (real nature).
