;hitoeng074.txt

74
(an inexperienced fellow) and hence you advise us to seek his shelter. Listen--
A large tree, endowed with fruit and shade, should be resorted to: if, through ill luck, there be no fruit who can take off the shade? Moreover,
A mean person should not be served; shelter should be taken with a great man; (for) even milk in the hands of a liquor-selling-woman is said to be (taken for) wine.
The extent (lit, multitude) of merits, although great, shrinks into smallness when coming in contact with one void of merits, by the relation of the receiver and the received, like a large elephant in a mirror. Especially,
When a king is very powerful, success can be obtained even by using a fiction: the hares lived happily by the fiction (fictitiously representing themselves as the servants) of the moon.
I asked how it was; and the birds related--
FABLE III.
Once upon a time, as there was no rain even in the rainy season, a herd of elephants, being oppressed with thirst, said to their chief-Lord, what means have we to save our lives? There is a place here (only) for little creatures to bathe; but for want of a bath we are as though blind; so whither can we go? What can we do? Thereupon the lord of the herd, going to a place not very far off, showed them a pond full of clear water. Then, as days passed on, the little hares that lived on its bank were crushed by the treadings of the elephants. Upon this a hare, Silimukha by name, thus deliberated. This herd of elephants, being troubled by thirst, must be coming here every day and thus our race is destroyed. Then a certain old hare, Vijaya by name, said--Be not sorry. I will remedy this. He then set out, having undertaken to achieve that. On his way he reflected. How shall I stand before the herd of elephants and address them--For,
An elephant kills though only touching; a serpent when simply smelling; a king though smiling; and a wicked man although (outwardly) showing honour.
[Page 65]
I shall, therefore, mount the top of the hill and address the
leader of the herd. That being done, the leader of the herd asked him--Who are you and where have you come from? He
