;hitoeng014.txt


praiseworthy. I, therefore, desire friendship with you. Kindly then favour me with your friendship. On hearing this, Hiranyaka asked from within his hole -- who are you? He said I am a crow, Laghupatanaka by name. Hiranyaka smilingly observed -- What friendship can there be with you ? For,
Whatever is fit to be united with another, in this world, the same a wise man should unite with that: I am the food and you the feeder: how can love (friendship) exist between us? And again,
Friendship between the food and its eater is simply the cause of misfortune: the deer that was caught in a snare, through (the stratagem of) a jackal was delivered by a crow. The crow asked -- How was that ? Hiranyaka related -- :

FABLE II. 

There is, in the country of Magadha, a vast wilderness, called Champakavati. In it there long lived in great friendship a deer and a crow. The deer, plump and sleek in body, was spied by a certain jackal, while roaming at will. On seeing him, the jackal said to himself -- Ah, how shall I come by his delicious flesh ! Well, let me first create confidence (in him). Having thus reflected, he went up to him and said -- Friend, is it all well with you? The dear asked -- Who are you? He replied -- I am a jackal, Kshudrabuddhi (Little-wit) by name. I live here, like one dead, having lost all my relatives. Now that I have found a friend in you and have (thus) a relative, I have once more entered the world of the living. Now I will, in every way, be your attendant. The deer said -- Be it so. Thereafter, when the divine Sun, the wearer of a wreath of rays, had set, the two went to the residence of the deer. There on the branch of a Champaka tree, lived a crow, named Subuddbi (Good-wit), an old friend of the deer. Seeing the two the crow asked -- Friend, who is this second ? The deer said -- This is a jackal who comes here desiring our friendship. The crow said, friend, friendship, all of a sudden, with a stranger, is not advisable. For it is said -- 
Shelter should not be given to any one whose family and disposition are not known; for the fault of a cat, the vulture, Jaradgava, suffered death.
The two asked how it was, whereupon the crow related --

FABLE III. 

There is a large Parkati tree on the hill, named Gridhrakut (the peak of Vultures), on the bank of the Bhagirathi,
