;hitoeng101.txt

101
named Samkata and Vikata, and also a tortoise, their friend, named Kambugriva. Once some fishermen, having come there said--We shall stay here to-day and (to-morrow) morning kill the fishes, turtles and others. On hearing that the tortoise said to the geese--Friends, have you heard the talk of the fishermen? What should I do now? The geese replied-Let it be ascertained again (what they will do) and then we shall do in the morning what is proper to be done. The tortoise observed--Not so. For I have seen a past occurrence here (or, I have seen the evil consequences of such a course here;—or, I see danger in this). And in respect of this it is said--
Anagatavidhata (Provider-against-the-evil-not-come) and Pratyutpannamati (Ready-witted)—these two flourish happily while Yadbhavishya (Come-what-will-be) perishes.
The two asked--How was this? The tortoise then related--
FABLE II.
Formerly in this very lake, when fishermen like these had come, three fishes took counsel together. A fish, Anagatavidhata by name, was one of them. He said--As for myself I will go to another pond. Having said so he went to another pool. Another fish, Pratyutpannamati by name, observed--Since there is no certainty of future events happening (as expected or in a particular way) where can I go? So when the emergency arises I shall act as the occasion would require. For it is said--
He is (really) talented who counteracts (surmounts) a difficulty as it arises; just as the wife of a merchant concealed her lover before (his very) eyes. Yadbhavishya asked how it was. Pratyutpannamati related--
FABLE III.
There was in Vikramapura a merchant, Samudradatta by name. His wife, named Ratnaprabha, always sported with one of her servants. For,
There is no one who is disagreeable to women, nor one who is beloved by them ; but they ever long for a new one, like Cows sueking fresh grass in a forest.
Now on one occasion that Ratnaprabha was seen impressing a kiss on the servant's mouth, by Samudradatta. Thereupon that profligate woman going up to him quickly said--My lord, great must be the fondness for ease of this our servant, since I have
