;hitoeng087.txt

87
Where the king is, there the treasure should also be; without the treasure there can be no royalty: from it (the treasure) the king should make payments to his servants: for who does not fight for one who gives (freely)? For,
Man is not the servant of men, O king, but he is the servant of money. Greatness or littleness too depends on the possession or absence of wealth.
They (the warriors) should fight in a compact body and defend one another; and whatever worthless portion of the army there may be should be placed in the middle of the column.
A king should place the infantry in the front of the army (or, send the infantry ahead of the army); he should wait having blocked up the enemy and also harass his country. Upon even ground he should fight with chariots and horses; in a place overflowing with water with boats and elephants; in a place covered with trees and shrubs, with bows; and on open land with swords, shields and other weapons.
He should ever and anon spoil his (enemy's) fodder, food, water and firewood; and demolish his tanks, ramparts and ditches. - 82.
The elephant forms the chief factor in a king's army: there is none other like him, because the elephant is said to possess eight weapons in his very limbs.
The cavalry is the strength of the army inasmuch as it forms a moving bulwark; a king, therefore, who is rich in cavalry, is victorious in a land-fight. For it is said--
Warriors fighting on horseback are difficult to be conquered even by the gods; the enemies, even though stationed at a distance, are (as it were) in their hands.
Striking the first blow in a battle, taking care of the whole army, and the clearing of roads in all directions--
(these three) they say, form the duty of the infantry.
[Page 76]
That army they declare to be the best, the soldiers in which are naturally brave, skilled in the use of weapons, loyal (lit. attached to their master), inured to fatigue and mostly drawn from the ranks of renowned Kshatriyas.
As men fight in this world, O king, by honour being shown to them by their lord, so they do not, oven by large sums of money being given to them.
