;hitoeng071.txt

71
As for the separation of friends, let it be in the house of your enemies; let villains being drawn away by the god of death meet with destruction day by day; may the people ever be the asylum of prosperity and happiness of every kind; and let young boys always sport in the delightful garden of stories. -182.
Chapter III.
WAR.
At the time of narrating the stories again, the princes said--Venerable Sir, we are princes. We have, therefore, a curiosity to hear about War. Vishnusarma said I will relate just what your honours like. Do you hear about (the subject of) War then, of which this is the first Sloka--
In the combat between the swans and the peacocks, in which equal valour was displayed, the swans were deceived, their confidence being gained by the crows, having resided in the enemy's house.
[Page 62]
The princes asked--How was that? Vishnusarma related as follows--There is, in Karpuradvipa, a lake, known as Padmakeli. In it dwelt a royal swan, Hiranyagarbha by name. He was installed their king by all the aquatic birds having assembled together. For,
If there be no king to guide the subjects properly, they would sink (in misery) in this world, like a boat without a helmsman in the sea. Moreover,
The king protects the subjects; they enrich the king: protection is better than enrichment: for in its absence, even what is, is not (i.e, no property is secure).
One day that royal swan was sitting at ease on a large lotus-couch surrounded by his retinue, when a crane, Dirghamukha by name, coming from some country, made his obeisance and sat down. Dirghamukha, said the king, you have come from a foreign country. Tell us the news. The crane replied, sire, there is great news and I have hastened here to communicate that. May Your Highness listen. There is a mountain, Vindhya by name, in Jambudvipa, where lives a peacock, Chitravarna by name, king of birds. While roaming in Dagdharanya, I was observed by his attendant birds and asked--Who are you and where have you come from? Whereupon
