;hitoeng012.txt

bad, one reaps the fruit of it, in obedience to the will of providence, from that cause, by that means, &c.
Disease, sorrow, affliction, restraint and calamities -- these are the fruits of the trees in the form of the faults committed by men.
The mouse quickly proceeded to sever the bonds of Chitragriva. Chirtagriva said -- Friend, do not do so; first cut the bonds of these my followers ; and then you will cut mine. Hiranyaka too replied -- I have little strength and my teeth are delicate, how then can I gnaw asunder the snares of these all? So as long as my teeth are not broken, I will cut your bonds and then sever those of the rest too as far as my strength will allow. Chitragriva said -- Be it so; but cut the bonds of these to the best of your strength. Hiranyaka replied -- The protection of dependents at the cost of one's life is not approved of by those conversant with the science of conduct (or, policy). For,
One should save money (as a provision) against the time of trouble, save one's wife even at the expense of wealth and save one's own self even at the cost of one's wife and wealth. 
[Page 11]
Another consideration is --
Life is the cause of the proper maintenance of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. * What does he not deprive himself of who deprives himself of it, or what does he not save who saves it?
Chitragriva said -- Friend, as for (the principle of) Policy it is such, indeed! But I am not, at all, able to bear the affliction of these my followers (lit., protegees). Hence I say this. For,
A wise man should give up his wealth and also his life for another's sake; their abandonment in a good cause is desirable as destruction is certain.
And this is another special reason.
They bear an equality to me as regards kind, substance and qualities : say then, when and what will be the fruit of my being their lord ?
Also,
Even without wages they do not leave my side (forsake me); therefore, save these my dependents, even at the sacrifice of my life. Moreover,

{* See. p. 3, 11, 23-26.}
