;hitoeng109.txt

109
There is no ordinance which says that one should fight with one's superior in power; for a cloud cannot, indeed, move contrary to the wind.
[Page 93]
Through the prowess of one who has been victorious in many battles, like that of Parasurama (the son of Jamadagni), every one is made subservient (to one's wishes) in every place and at all times.
Enemies quickly yield to him with whom a victor in many battles forms an alliance, through his (the latter's) prowess.
Then this king, who is endowed with many qualities, should be made peace with. Chakravaka said--Spy, we have known everything. Go now and come back having gathered further intelligence. The king asked Chakravaka--Minister, who are those with whom it is not advisable to form an alliance? I wish to know them also. The minister replied--My lord, I will tell you that. Kindly listen.
One who is a child, who is old, who is subject to protracted diseases, he who is excommunicated from (or, disowned by) his caste, who is timid or has timid servants, who is avaricious or has avaricious servants, whose subjects (or, ministers) are disattached, who is exceedingly addicted to carnal pleasures, who is fickle-minded in receiving his counsels, who talks ill (or speaks disrespectfully) of the gods and the Brahmanas (a blasphemer), one condemend by fate, a fatalist, he who is smitten with the calamity of famine, who is in danger (or, difficulty) from his army, one not in his own country (or, one not a native of the country), one who has many enemies, one whom time does not favour (i.e., fighting at a very unfavourable time), and one who has departed from truth and religion (an apostate)--these are the twenty men (or kings) with whom one should not make peace but simply fight on; for those, if warred against in no time, fall into their enemy's hands.
On account of the little power (or, influence) a child(-king) possesses, people do not wish to fight for him; because one of a tender age is not able to know the fruit (consequences) of
fighting or not fighting.
He who is old, and he who has been long ailing--these two, being destitute of the power of energy, are, undoubtedly, overpowered by their own men. He, who has been disowned by all his kinsmen, is easily uprooted; for those very kinsmen, when won over, kill him. -41.42
10
