;hitoeng062.txt

62
dismissed all ministers, placed him alone at the head of all affairs, was in itself a blunder. For--
The goddess of royalty stands having placed her feet on a minister when very highly exalted and the king; but she, unable long to bear the burden, being of the nature of a woman, gives up one of the two. Moreover,
When a king makes one minister the (sole) authority in a kingdom, vanity takes possession of him through delusion, and he alienates himself (from the king) through indolence brought on by vanity; when (once) alienated, a desire for independence springs up in his mind; and then led by the desire for independence he (the minister) acts treacherously even to the extent of robbing the king of his life. Again,
Of rice tainted with poison, of a tooth got loose and of a minister turned a traitor, complete eradication leads to happiness. Also, -127.
[Page 54]
A king, who places his royal fortune under his minister's control, will, in the event of his (minister's) being in calamity, experience trouble like a blind man without guides.
He proceeds in (conducts) all affairs according to his will. Your Highness, therefore, is the authority is to decide as to what is to be done under these circumstances. As for myself
Now this--
There is not that man in this world who does not covet riches: who, in this world, does not wistfully look at the youthful and charming wife of another?
The lion observed reflecting--Dear Damanaka, although such is the case, still great is the affection that I have for Samjivaka. Behold!
Although committing offences, a favourite is a favourite : who does not like the body although affected with all humours? Again,
He who is dear is so although doing unpleasant things; who has disregard for (has not to do with) fire although it has consumed all the substance in the house?
Damanaka replied--My lord, and just therein lies the fault. For,
He on whom the king fixes his eye more (than on others)-- be he a son, or a minister, or a stranger-is resorted to by the goddess of wealth. May Your Highness listen--
