;hitoeng043.txt

43
He, who wishes to meddle with matters which are not business of his, lies dead on the ground like the monkey that pulled out the wedge. - 30. 
Damanaka asked-How was this? Karataka said--
FABLE I.
In a place near the holy forest in the country of Magadha, a certain man of the writer class, Subhadatta by name, was having a convent built. A carpenter had put a wedge between the two split-up parts of a beam which was being cut with a saw and which was cleft to some length. A troop of apes came there prancing about. One of the apes, as if urged by Death, caught hold of the wedge with his hands and sat there, while his lower parts hanging down entered the split between the two pieces of the wood. Then through the mischievous spirit natural to his species, he drew out the wedge with great effort. As soon as the wedge was pulled out, those parts were squeezed and he perished. Hence I say–He who wishes to meddle with matters &c. Damanaka said-Still a servant ought to watch the actions of his master. Karataka replied--Let the prime minister who has charge of all affairs do it. For, a servant must, under no circumstances, interfere with (lit, sit in discussion over) another's business. See,
He, who interferes with another's business with a view to serve his master's good, comes to grief like the ass that was beaten for braying.
Damanaka inquired how it was and Karataka thus went on--
[Page 37]
FABLE II.
In Varanasi dwelt a washerman, named Karpura-pataka. One day, he, having sported for a long time with his young wife, slept soundly. Thereafter a robber got in with the object of stealing the things in the house. In his court-yard there were a donkey tied down and a dog sitting. Now the ass said to the dog-Friend, this is properly your office. Why don't you then rouse the master by barking aloud? The dog replied--Friend, you should not meddle with my business. Don't you yourself know that I guard his house day and night? Since he has been happy for a long time he does not know of what use I am to him and takes but scanty care to feed me. For, unless some danger is in sight masters care but little for their servants.
The donkey replied --Hear me, barbarian.
