;hitoeng068.txt

68
He raises his hand from a distance (by way of greeting) and has his eyes moist (with tears of joy); he proffers half of his seat, he is ready to give a close embrace, shows great regard in making inquiries and talking about one's beloved persons, hes poison inside, but is all sweetness from outside, and is an expert in deceit (or dissembling ): what pantomimic art is this, unheard of before, that has beon learnt by the wicked ?
To make matters clear
For crossing the impassable sea there is the boat (provided), the lamp against the approach of darkness, the fan when there is absence of breeze and the goad for quelling the pride of elephants stupified by rut: thus there is nothing on earth, to provide a remedy against which, care bas not been taken by the Oreator; but, methinks, even the Creator is foiled in his efforts to dispel the (evil) tendencies of the minds of the wicked.
Samjivaka, heaving a sigh again—Alas! Oh, pity! that I, as corn-eater, should be falled by a lion!! For,
Between those two only whose wealth is equal, or whose power is equal, a dispute can well be understood; but never between the best and the worst.
(Reflecting again) I do not know who has set (poisoned the mind of) this king against me. One has to be always in dread of a king whose feelings are estranged. For,
When a king's mind has once been alienated from his minister who can re-unite it, like a crystal bracelet when broken? Moreover,
The thunderbolt and kingly power-—these two are extremely terrible: but the one falls in one place, the other (exerts its influence) all round.
Death in battle, therefore, should be accepted. It will not be proper for me, now, to act in obedience to his commands. Because,
If dead, he (a brave warrior) attains heaven; if he kills the foe he obtains happiness: these two advantages, which the valiant possess, are very rare.
And this is the fit time for battle.
When out of battle death is certain, but in battle life is doubtful (there is some chance of living), then that, the wise declare to be the time for battle. For,
