;hitoeng063.txt

B3
The result of what is wholesome although unpleasant, is happy: riches delight (to live) there where there is a speaker and a hearer (of things wholesome though disagreeable).
You, having discarded old servants, advanced this stranger. And this was a wrong step. For,
Having cast off old servants one should not honour strangers: because there is no other fault so destructive to royalty than this.
The lion said--What wonder! Since he was brought here by me having pledged my word of safety and was well taken care of, how can he turn a traitor to me? Damanaka observed--
Sire,
A wicked man, even though served every day, reverts to his natural disposition, like a dog's tail resuming (its natural) bent, notwithstanding such remedies as causing sweat (by fumigation) and rubbing it with unguents (for making it straight). Again,
A dog's tail, made to sweat, rubbed and bound round with strings, returned to its nature when set free (even) after twelve years.
Moreover,
Whence can advancement or bestowal of honour please the wicked? Poisonous trees, although watered with nectar, do not bring forth fruit wholesome to eat.
Hence my observation--
One should say what is beneficial to him whose ruin one does not wish; this is the duty of the good; the contrary is otherwise (i. e is the way of action of bad men). - 138.
It is said in connexion with this--
[Page 55]
He has affection (for us) who dissuades (us) from evil; that is an act which is pure; she is a wife, who is obedient; he is talented who is esteemed by the good; that is wealth which begets no vanity; he is happy who is free from desire; he is a friend who is sincere (lit. artless); and he is a man who is not troubled by the senses (i. e. has his senses under control).
If Your Highness who stands in imminent danger from Samjivaka, does not turn back after being warned (lit. informed), then the blame does not lie with a servant like myself.
A king who is addicted to carnal pleasures does not mind the business he has to attend to or his good, but led by his free
