; hitoeng007.txt

The traveller, who through the lust of a bracelet, sank in deep mire and being caught by an old tiger, lost his life.
The pigeons asked how it was ; whereupon he related --
FABLE 1. 
Once while roaming in the southern forest I saw -- A certain old tiger, having bathed and taken Kusa grass in his paw, used to address (the passers by sitting) on the margin of a lake (thus) -- "Ho, ho, travellers, take this gold bracelet." Then a certain traveller, attracted by greed, thought to himself -- This happens by good luck. But I must not proceed in a matter where there is personal risk. For,
Although a desired object be obtained from an undesirable source, the result is not good ; even nectar (or sweet-food), which is contaminated with poison, leads to death.
But an attempt to get wealth is in every case, attended with peril. And it is said in connection with this --
Without embarking upon an adventure a man does not see good fortune ; but if he does embark upon it and lives (survives it), he sees it.
Let me therefore carefully see it. He said aloud -- "Where is thy bracelet?" The tiger stretched forth his paw and showed it. The traveller said - How am I to trust thee who art ferocious ? The tiger replied -- Listen, O traveller. Formerly, indeed, in the days of youth, I was extremely wicked. On account of my slaughter of many a cow and man, my sons and wife perished ; and I am without issue. I was then advised by a holy man to practice charity and do such other holy deeds. Following his counsel, I am now in the habit of bathing and giving gifts ; I am old and have lost my nails and teeth ; how can I not be an object of confidence then! For, 
[Page 7]
 Sacrificing, studying one's prescribed portion (of the Vedas), charity, penance, truthfulness, patience, forgiveness and freedom from avarice -- this is the eightfold way of doing religious duties as laid down in the Smritis. 
; - 8.
Out of these the first four may be practised even for display, while the last four are found in the magnanimous-hearted only.
And so great is my freedom from desire, that I wish to give away, to any body whatsoever, the gold bracelet although secure in my hand. Yet the (indescriminate) talk of the people
