;hitoeng044.txt

44
He is bad servant and a bad friend or, is he a servant? is he a friend?) who asks for reward at the time of action (in the hour of need). The dog replied--He is a bad master (or, is he a master?) who speaks sweetly to his servants at the time of need. For,
In supporting dependents, in serving a master, in the discharge of religious duties and in begetting a gon, substitutes will not do.
The donkey said in a rage-O thou evil-minded one, thou art a villain, since thou neglectest thy master's business at a critical time. Well, let it be. But I must do that by which my master will wake up. For,
One should enjoy the heat of the sun from (by exposing) the back-side, fire by the stomach, a master with all one's heart and soul, and the next world with absence of deceit (a pure heart).
With these words, he brayed aloud. Then the washerman, roased by that braying, and angry that his slumbers should have been disturbed, got up and belaboured the donkey with a stick.
Hence I say--He who interferes with another's business &c. See-Our office is just to look for game. Let us attend to that. (After reflecting). But we are not concerned with that to-day. For there is plenty of food yet left after what was eaten by us. Damanaka observed angrily--How is it that you serve the king merely for the sake of food? This is unworthy of you. For,
The service of kings is desired by the wise that they should be able to do good to their friends and evil to their enemies; (or else) who does not merely fill the belly?
Fruitful is the life of him, who living, Brahmaņas, friends, and relations live; for, who does not live for his own self? Moreover,
He really lives, who living, many live: does not a crow fill his belly with his bill? Lo!
[Page 38]
Some man becomes a servant for five puranas (a kind of inferior coin), another is satisfied with lacs, while another is not to be had even for lacs. Again,
When mankind is all equal, a state of servitude is much to be despised: but is he to be counted among the living who is not first even in that (service)? And in connexion with this, it is said--
