;hitoeng112.txt

112
What ingenuity is there in deceiving those who have reposed confidence (in you)? What sort of prowess is that if one kills a man who has fallen asleep having reclined on the lap?
Listen, my lord. The minister knew me at first sight. But the king was noble-minded, and so I could deceive him. And it is said--
He, who from his own analogy considers a knave to be a speaker of truth, is deceived, just as the Brahmana was by rogues with respect to a goat.
The king asked how it was. The crow thus related--
FABLE IX.
A certain Brahmana had commenced a sacrifice in Gotama's forest. As he was wending his way back after having purchased a goat for the sacrifice at some village and taken it on his shoulders, he was noticed by three villains. Then the villains, thinking to themselves that if by some means they could get the goat they would display their wit to its utmost, stood under three trees at an interval of two miles each, on the way, awaiting the Brahmana's arrival. Now as the Brahmana passed on, one of the villains said--Ho Brahmana, why is it that you are carrying a dog on your shoulder? The Brahmana replied--this is not a dog, but a sacrificial goat. Then he was addressad the game question by another villain standing next (to the first). On hearing that the Brahmana took off the goat from his shoulder, placed it on the ground and having examined it again and again, replaced it on his shoulder and set off, but with a wavering mind. For,
[Page 96]
Surely the mind even of the good wavers on hearing the words of the wicked; and he who is led into confidence by such (words) perishes, as did the camel Chitrakarna.
The king asked how it was, upon which he thus west on :--
FABLE X.
In a certain part of a forest there lived a lion, by name Madotkata. He had three servants, a crow, a tiger and a jackal. Once, as they were roaming about, they saw a camel that had strayed from the herd and asked him where he had come from. He told his account. Then he was taken to the lion and presented. The lion gave him his word of safety, named him Chitrakarna and asked him to stay with him. Now on one occasion, owing to the lion's indisposition and there being a heavy rain, they, not getting anything to eat, were in distress.
