;hitoeng056.txt

56
off all other connexions. Then Damanaka and Karataka, finding that there was a relaxation in dealing out food even to the servants, consulted mutually. Then Damanaka said to Karataka-Friend, what is to be done? This is our own fault. And it is not proper to lament over an evil of one's own making. For it is said--
I for having touched Svarnarekha, the procuress for having bound herself, the merchant for wishing to steal the gem--all these suffered for their own faults. Karataka asked--How was that? Damanaka went on--
FABLE V
In the city of Kanchanapura lived a king named Viravikrama. As his officer of justice was leading a barber to the place of execution, the latter was held by the skirt of his garment by a certain recluse, Kandarpaketu by name, accompanied by another man, Sadhu (a mendicant), with the words "This barber should not be killed." The king's officers asked why he should not be killed. He said, hear--He repeated--I having touched Svarnarekha &c. They asked--How is this?
[Page 49]
The recluse told as follows--I am the son of Jimutaketu, king
of Ceylon, Kendarpaketu by name. One day as I sat in the pleasure-garden I heard from a sea-faring merchant, that, on the fourteenth day of the month, there was to be seen on the sea, under a desire-granting tree that appeared then-seated upon a sofa variegated with a ring of the rays of gems and decorated with ornaments of all kinds --maiden, like the goddess Lakshmi, playing upon a lyre. Then I, in company with the sea-merchant, got on board his ship, and sailed for the place. On going there I saw, as described, on a sofa, the damsel, half submerged. Then charmed with her beauty I gave a jump after her. After that on reaching a golden city, I saw her seated on a couch, in the same manner, in a gold palace, and attended by Vidyadhara women. She too, having seen me from a distance, sent her friend and (through her) addressed me with respect.
To my inquiry her friend replied-–This is the daughter of Kandarpaketu, the imperial king of the Vidyadharas, Ratnamanjari by name. She has taken this vow_"He who having come to Kanakapattana beholds it with his eyes will be my husband even in the absence of my father". Such is her mind's resolve. Your Honour should, therefore, marry her by the
