;hitoeng055.txt

55
Not accepting the money coming to hand, misappropriation of money, easy compliance, neglect, want of judgment, absence of perception (taking a right view of things), and enjoyment (habit of luxury)--these are the faults in a minister.
Finding out means to seize the money (illegally) obtained by an officer, daily supervision (over the officers' work), bestowing honours (according to merit) and change of duties,-this
is the duty of kings.
[Page 48]
Officers, unless hard pressed, will not disgorge the royal money embezzled by them for they are mostly like malignant ulcers (which also do not give out the putrid matter without being pressed).
A king should fine* repeatedly (corrupt) officers large sums of money: for does the garment used at the time of bathing yield up (give out) much water when wrung out only once?
One should remember all this and act accordingly, as an emergency may arise. Pingalaka said--It is just so. But these two never obey my order. Stabdhakarna observed–-This is not at all proper. For,
A king should not forgive those who disobey orders, even though they be his sons: for (in that case) what difference can there be between such) a king and one drawn in a picture? Moreover,
The fame of one who is inactive comes to an end; so does the friendship of one of unsettled conduct; the family of one who has lost the vigour of his senses; the sense of duty of one intent on acquiring wealth; the fruit of the learning of one who is addicted to vices; the happiness of a miser, and the sovereignty of one whose ministers are careless. More especially,
A king should, like a father, protect his subjects from robbers, from his officers, from enemies, from his favourites and from his own avarice.
Brother, let my advice be always acted upon. I too have transacted business. Let this Samjivaka who eats corn be appointed to superintend the treasury.
That being done, from that time onward, Pingalaka and Samjivaka passed their time in great friendship, having left
* Or, ought to fine officers who have misappropriated sums of money.
