;hitoeng090.txt

90
Viravara was called back and given a betel-nut-roll and four hundred coins of gold. The king very secretly watched the use he made of them. Half of the money Viravara gave to the gods and the Brahmanas; half of what remained to the distressed, and the remainder he spent in food and amusements. Having done all these daily duties he attended, sword in hand, at the king's door, day and night. He also went home whenever the king ordered him to do so.
Once, on the fourteenth night of the dark half of a month, the king heard a plaintive sound of lamentation. Sudraka asked--Who waits at the door? He replied--I, Viravara. The king said--Follow the sound of wailing. Saying, 'As Your Majesty commands', away went Viravara. Now the king reflected--It is not proper that I sent this prince, all alone, in the pitchy darkness. I will, therefore, go after him and see what this might mean. So the king, too, took his sword and went out of the city, following his course. Viravara, on reaching the place, saw a woman, endowed with beauty and youth and decorated with ornaments of every description, crying; and asked her--Who are you? Why do you weep? The woman replied--I am the goddess of royalty of this king, Sudraka. I have long lived in great happiness under the shadow of his arms, but now I shall (have to) go elsewhere. Viravara said--Where there is a possibility of danger there is also a remedy. By what means then will the stability of your divine self here be ensured? The goddess of royalty said--If you will offer up your son, Saktidhara, endowed with thirty-two auspicious marks, to the goddess Sarvamangala (presiding over all blessings), then I can again live here happily for a long time. Saying so she disappeared from view.
[Page 79]
Viravara then went home and roused his wife, who was asleep, and his son. They having shaken off their sleep rose and sat down. Viravara communicated to them all that the goddess had said to him.
Hearing that Saktidhara, being full of joy, said--Blessed am I, being such as will be useful for the preservation of our lord's sovereignty. Then father, what occasion is there for delay? The use of this body, in such a cause as this, whenever it may be, is praiseworthy, For--
A wise man should give up bis wealth and life for others; their abandonment in a good cause is better when destruction is certain.
