;hitoeng089.txt

89
Now the spy despatched by his emissary came to Hiranyagarbha and said--Sire, king Chitavarna is almost arrived. Now he is on the table-land of the Malaya mountain with his army encamped there. The castle should be carefally searched every moment: for, the vulture is a great statesman and in the course of his confidential talk with some one, I came to know his secret that he had already placed some one in our castle. My lord, said Chakravaka, that could be the crow alone. It can never be, remarked the king. For, if this were the case, how could he have shown readiness to punish the parrot? Besides, it
[Page 78]
was after the departure of the parrot, that an eagerness for war
was displayed there, while he is here for a long time. The minister remarked--Still a stranger must be suspected. The king rejoined-Even strangers are sometimes observed to be benefactors. Listen--
Even a stranger doing good is a relative, while a relative doing harm is a stranger (an enemy); a disease taking its birth in the body is injurious, while a medicinal herb produced in the forest is salutary. Moreover,
There was a servant of the king Sudraka, Viravara by name, who in a short time, offered up his son. Chakravaka asked how it was; the king related--
FABLE VIII.
Formerly I fell in love with Karpuramanjari, daughter of the royal gander, Karpurakeli by name, who lived in the pleasure-lake of king Sudraka. A certain prince, Viravara by name, coming from some country, approached the royal gate and addressed the porter thus--I, for one, am a prince whose object is wages (to seek service); procure me the sight of the king. Thereupon, he, being ushered into the royal presence by him, said--Sire, if you wish to engage me as a servant fix my salary. Sudraka asked--What is your salary? Viravara replied--Four hundred gold coins per day. The king demanded What are your accoutrements? Viravara replied--my two arms, and the third, my sword. The king said--This is not possible. On hearing that he bowed and departed. Now the ministers observed--Sire, having given him his four days' pay let us know his characteristic nature--whether he receives such salary usefully (deservedly), or without being of use. Then, in accordance with the ministers' advice,
