;hitoeng018.txt


He is a kinsman who stands (by one) in joy as well as in misery, when there is a famine or when a kingdom is overthrown, at the royal gate or in a cemetery.
The Jackal having again and again looked at the net, thought to himself -- As for this net it is very strong; and said -- Friend, these snares are made of sinews. How then, can I touch these with my teeth to-day, it being Sunday ? Friend, if you will not think otherwise (i.e. will not have any misconception about me) tomorrow morning I will do whatever you will bid me do. With these words, he concealed himself near him and remained (waiting). Afterwards the crow, seeing that the deer did not return in the evening, looked for him here and there, and having discovered him in that condition, said -- Friend, what is this? The deer replied –- This is the result of my disregard of a friend's advice. For, it is said
Adversity stands close to him who listens not to the words of well-meaning friends: such a man is the delight of his enemies.
The crow asked -- Where is that traitor? The deer said -- Desirous of my flesh he waits just here. The crow said I had already said (as much).
"I have committed no fault" -- this is no reason for putting confidence (in a wicked man) : for, even the meritorious have fear from the wicked.
Those, whose life has ended, perceive not the smell of an extinguished lamp, listen not to the words of a friend, and see not the star Arundhati. 
; 77. 
[Page 16] 
He who defeats one's object in one's absence and speaks sweetly in one's presence -- such a friend one should avoid, like a vessel full of poison with milk at the surface.
Then the crow, having heaved a deep sigh, said -- Ah villain, what hast thou done in acting so wickedly ? For,
What (glory or credit) is there in deceiving supplicants, in this world, who are made to converse (with you) by using sweet words, who are won over by false attentions, and who (thereby) entertain hopes and have placed confidence in you)?
O divine Earth, how dost thou bear (on thy surface) that man, treacherous to his promise, who practises evil upon a benevolent, unsuspecting (lit., full of confidence) and simple-hearted person ?
