;hitoeng033.txt

33
or persons seeking protection go not away with faces turned back through disappointment (lit. frustration of hopes).
Thus did they (the three friends) live in happy contentment, feasting and sporting at will.
Now on one occasion, a deer, Chitranga by name, frightened by some one, came and joined them. Thereupon, apprehending that the person who had caused the fright might be coming after the deer, Manthara entered the water, the mouse a hole and the crow flew up and perched on the top of a tree. Then Laghupatanaka, looking to a great distance, found that no one that would cause fright was coming. Then in pursuance of his words all of them again joined company and sat just there. Manthara said--Good, O deer, you are welcome. You are at liberty to enjoy provisions such as water and the like. Do you favour the forest with your residence here (lit, let the forest have a master by your residence here). Chitranga said, I who was alarmed by the hunters have come to you for protection and desire your friendship. Hiranyaka replied-As for friendship, you have secured that without an effort. For,
A friend is known to be of four kinds, viz.-by whole blood, by family connexion, & hereditary friend and one delivered from misfortunes.
Your Honour, therefore, should live here as if in your own house (Make yourself quite at home here ). Upon hearing this, the deer was delighted and having eaten at pleasure and drunk water sat in the shade of & tree that grew near the water. Now Manthara asked-Friend deer, by whom were you
frightened in this desolate wood? What, are there huntsmen 
[Page 28]
roaming about? The deer replied in the country of Kalinga
there is a king, Rukmangada by name. In the courses of his conquest of the quarters he has come here and stays on the bank of the Chandrabhâgâ with his army encamped there. And & rumour is heard from the mouth of sportsmen that to-morrow he is sure to come and take his residence near the Karpúra lake. So having regard to the fact that our residence here to-morrow is beset with danger, do what the time demands. Hoaring that the tortoise said in terror-I will make for another pool. The crow and the deer, too, said-Let it be go. Then Hiranyaka said smilingly-It will be all well with Manthara when another lake is reached, but what means of protection has he whilo crawling along the ground ? For,
