;hitoeng122.txt

122
the foundation of friendship. It is this Samgata Samdhi, which lasts during life in which the interests of both the parties are equally represented, and which is not broken by accidents (or, causes) either in prosperous or adverse times, that is also called, on account of its superior excellence, like that of gold, Kanchana, by those adept in the science of forming alliances.
That which is made by having in view the accomplishment of one's own object is called Upanyasa by those versed in the doctrine of making overtures of peace (to an enemy).
I have conferred a favour upon him: he will repay it: the alliance which is formed on this principle is styled Pratikara.-120
I will render a service to him, and he too will render a similar one to me--that which is formed with such an intention is also denominated Pratikara, as in the case of Rama and Sugriva.
When, having definitely aimed at the achievement of one common object (one goal to be reached), (two parties) enter into an alliance duly ratified (or, the terms of enforcement being
well-secured), it is called Samyoga.
[Page 104]
That alliance in which a condition is made (by each party)
that its interests can be safeguarded by its principal warriors, is Purushantara.
That in which an enemy lays down the condition that a particular party alone will accomplish his purpose is said to be Adrishtapurusha.
That in which a powerful (victorious) enemy forms an alliance on condition that a portion of land is ceded (to him by the other party) is designated Adishta by those versed in the doctrine of peace-making.
That is spoken of as Atmadishta in which common cause is made with one's own army. And when everything is relinquished to the enemy as the (only) means of saving one's life, that is called Upagraha.
That is styled Parikraya which is made at the cost of a part of, or the half of, or even the whole of, the treasury, in order that the rest (other property) may be saved.
That wherein very valuable lands are relinquished is called Uchchhanna ; and when the whole fruit (produce) of the land is given away, it is called Parabhushana (ornament to the enemy).
That alliance in which a specified quantity (part of the produce of the land) that can be borne on the shoulders is
