;hitoeng052.txt

52
'Talent, indeed, is of greater consequence than physical strength, for the lack of which such is the condition of elephants-this, as it were, the kettle-drum, sounding, proclaims, when beaten by the elephant-driver.'
Then Samjivaka asked in fear--General, what am I to do? Tell me that. Karataka said if thou at all wishest to live safe
in this wood, go and bow to the lotus-like feet of our lord.
[Page 45]
Samjivaka replied--Then give me the promise of safety and I
will go--for this purpose let your honour offer me your right hand as a pledge. Karataka replied—-Dismiss this foar, O bull! For,
Kesava returned not a reply to the king of Chedi who was abusing him: the lion roars in response to the thunder of clouds and not to the howlings of jackals. Again,
A hurricane does not uproot grass, soft and bending humbly all round; but it works havoc upon the lofty trees--a great man exerts his might only upon the great.
Now the two, having posted Samjivaka at some distance, repaired into the presence of the lion. Then being received with respectful attention by the king they bowed and sat down. The king asked (Damanaka)-Did you see the beast ? Damanaka said in reply--Yes, Your Highness. But what Your Highness conjectured is quite so (correct). He is certainly huge and seeks an interview with Your Highness. But as his strength is great, Your Highness should receive him, after putting yourself in a defensive position. Let not Your Highness be alarmed at the mere sound. For it is said--
One should not be alarmed at a mere sound, without knowing its cause. Having found out the cause of the sound, a procuress attained honour.
The king asked-how was this? Damanaka related :
FABLE IV.
There is a city, called Brahmapura, on the mountain Sriparvata. A rumour had got current there that its peak was haunted by a giant, called Ghantakrana. One day, a robber who was running away with a bell, was killed by a tiger and devoured. The bell, fallen from his hands, was picked up by monkeys, who used to ring it every moment. Now the inhabitants of the city found the man eaten there. And the sound of the bell too was constantly heard. Thereupon, saying
