HITOPADES'A 
--=-:: = 
Hay sucoess attend the good in their undertakings ( in the object they wish to aocomplish) by the favoar ot bat Dharjati, on whose head there is B digit of the moon louking like a streak of the foam of the Gang.,. 
This Hitopadesa (the work inculcating sailltary instruotion) when studied (lit., carefaally attended to) give, (the student) proficiency in elegant speeOh6!, a variety of expression in every department and a knowledge of the conduct of human affairs. 
A wise man should think: of (acquiring) knowledge and money as though he were not subject to old age or death: but he should perform bis religiou3 duties as if Death had seized him by the hair. 
Learning, of all things, ( the wise) declaro to be without a .nl,erior (the best of tbem all), because of its incapability of being taken away, or valued or 8xhflusted. 
Learning, although possessed by a low man, introduoes him to the king who ia (ordinarily) inapproachable, just as a river, although flowing through a low region, takes one to the i naccessible sea: (sources) from which Howeth great fortune (or, the future rests with fortune). 
Learning endows one with modesty j from (having) modesty one passes on to (gets) worthiness i being worthy one obtains riches; from riches religious merit aud from that happiness. 
The knowledge of arms and that of the S.J.stras-these two lares conduce to glory: but the former expos os one to ridioule in old age. while tbe latter is e1'er respected. 
As an impression made upon a raw (earthen or 50) pot aan -andergo no change afterwards-so (following the same principle) in this work the soience of con4uct (or policy) i~ taught to 'youths under the guise of stories. 
p. 2 . [The subjects of] (. The acquisition of frieDd~", It Tho aeparation of friends " , "Making war " and . r Ooncluding peaoe" are written upon, extracts being mnde from Pancbatantra aud other work!!. 
On the bank of the Dbu.gl rathi there is a oi ty named ;P1~ta.liputra. In it there was a king, SuJnlsbana by name, 

