Hariom. 

All the relations can be only of three kinds.
Desha, kala and vastu. Spatial, temporal and objective.
   1) Desha or SPACE:-- 
1) Near, far (or distant) and remote (somewhere  unknown place).
2) Small or narrow area and larger area.
3) Left and right.  Front and back. Above and below. 
4) Inside and outside.
5) There are several shapes of empty space or cavity, like triangular, rectangular and spherical, cylindrical spaces and such others.
     2) Kala or TIME
1) Past present and future. 
2) Shorter duration and longer duration. (Cyclic time. Smaller cycle within the bigger cycle. Like minutes, hours, days, weeks, months and years, yugas etc.) 
3) The idea of sequence or krama  is time, the relation is called purvaapari bhaava or the relation of previous and later.
   3) Vastu or OBJECT

 3) Relations pertaining to Vastu or OBJECT

  1) Dravya- Guna or Guna and Guni- bhava or substantive and attribute (or noun and adjective).
2) Dravya and kriya  Or Substantive and action. 
  3) Shakti and Shaktiman or power and and the powerful. Or knowledge and knower. Or Capacity and the capable etc. 
4) Karya and Karana  (upadana karana) or cause and effect. 
5) Vyasti and Samasti or a part and whole. Or Anga and angi- bhava or sesha and seshi bhava. Or Organisation and its member. Or nation and citizen etc etc. 
   6) Owner and owned or possessor and possessed. Or owner and property. Which means Svamitvam or mamakara. 
     6) King and praja or Swami and bhrutya (Or Master and servant) which means  Ruler and ruled or protector and protected. This may include parent and child. Or Ashraya and ashrita. 
  7) Wife and Husband.
  8) Teacher and taught or Guru and Sishya.  
  9) Jnata and jneyam or Knower and known or Subject and object.
 10) Karta and karma.
Karya and karana (Nimitta karana) can also be called producer and produced or maker and made. (Or Artist and art, Pot-maker and pot etc.)
 11) Bhokta and bhogyam, Enjoyer and enjoyed or Experiencer and experienced. 
  12) Naiyayikas talk of Samavaya sambandha and Samyoga sambandha. 
       At the moment I am able to think of only these. There are many more like these. I think you can imagine or discover more by your own observation. 
     I have not come across all these together in any one book. They are all scattered in various books. You may add some more and make sure that they are not repeated, but there should be some difference in it to consider it as an another sambandha. 
After finding out more,  you may write an essay on it and send it to the same Vidvat Parishad where you asked this question before. 
    Om. Narayana.

(--A write up from my Gurudeva)

Swami Prakashanandendra Sarasvati
